A.  **SPECIFIC AIMS**

Four out of five patients with ischemic heart disease (IHD) are
unrecognized by electrocardiography (ECG) and clinical exam.^1^ The
majority of sudden cardiac death (SCD) still occurs in those without
diagnosed IHD,^2^ and although the overall rate of cardiovascular
mortality is declining, the rate of community events has not declined
proportionally.^3^ A growing body of literature suggests that autonomic
dysfunction is not only of prognostic value in cardiovascular
mortality,^4^ but may serve as a novel risk factor for IHD. [Recently, a
new ECG-based biomarker of autonomic dysfunction based on heart rate
variability (HRV), named *Dyx*, was found to be an important predictor
of myocardial ischemia.]{.underline}^5^ *Dyx* is calculated from an
hour-long recording of ambulatory ECG, and low values (\< 2.0 units) are
associated with an 8-fold increased odds of positive nuclear stress test
findings (suggesting IHD).^5^ While promising, the study was limited by
a small sample size, it did not assess for relationship with
angiographic findings, and the outcome used, single photon emission
tomography (SPECT), is only 80% sensitive and specific for obstructive
coronary artery disease (CAD).^6^ In an analysis I independently
conducted that was highlighted at the 2018 American Heart Association
Scientific Sessions, we found that that low *Dyx* in the early morning
was predictive of myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI) deficits in a
cohort of 276 veteran twins without known CAD.^7^ We found for the first
time that the time of day in which HRV is measured is a critical step in
measuring heart disease risk. Nonetheless, we were unable to
differentiate whether this relationship is due to obstructive CAD
(requiring revascularization) and/or abnormal vascular reactivity
(likely microvascular). This is important when considering the clinical
implications of low *Dyx*.

Low *Dyx*, as with other HRV metrics, is influenced by central
neurologic mechanisms, and in an unpublished analysis in our twins
dataset, we found a robust association between depressive symptoms and
Dyx. This relationship is consistent with the neurovisceral integration
theory, which describes a network of brain regions that influence
cognitive function, mood, and autonomic regulation.^8^ [Neurovisceral
dysfunction]{.underline} occurs in the setting of neuropsychological
pathology, such as in depression and cognitive impairment, which have
well-known effects on autonomic regulation,^9,10^ confer a worse
prognosis in coronary artery disease (CAD),^11,12^ and increase the risk
of SCD.^13,14^ One remaining question is to what extent low Dyx values
are due to brain-related factors, rather than (or in addition to)
obstructive CAD.^8,15^ By evaluating the relationship of brain-based
metrics and CAD with Dyx in the same population, we can better evaluate
the best intervention for this important prognostic marker.

[I hypothesize that disturbances of the neurocardiac axis, assessed by
both heart and brain metrics, result in autonomic dysfunction, which can
be measured by *Dyx*.]{.underline} As such, Dyx is a useful metric in
both efforts to risk stratify for CAD, as well as detect neurovisceral
dysfunction. We propose to study *Dyx* by measuring HRV through
ambulatory ECG patches (BioStampÂ®, MC10 Inc.) in the Emory
Cardiovascular Biobank. The Biobank is a prospective cohort study of
individuals undergoing cardiac catherization, and records data on
angiographic outcomes, and conducts validated neuropsychological
assessments.^16^ The data we collect from this proposal will allow the
assessment of autonomic function prior to the heart catheterization and
its relationship to IHD and its relationship to neurovisceral
dysfunction. We will test the central hypotheses through two proposed
aims:

1.  **To evaluate the relationship of autonomic dysfunction, measured by
    abnormal HRV, on the spectrum of progressive CAD.**
    *[Hypothesis]{.underline}:* *Lower Dyx in the morning hours will be
    predictive of increasing CAD plaque burden (Syntax score),
    independent of traditional risk factors.* Coronary artery stenosis
    will be measured visually at time of cardiac catherization. We will
    also test if specific cutoff points of *Dyx* are predictive for
    obstructive CAD (stenosis \>= 70%).

2.  **To determine the effect of neurovisceral dysfunction on autonomic
    dysfunction.** *[Hypothesis]{.underline}: Neurovisceral dysfunction,
    as measured through depression, stress, and cognitive impairment,
    will be independent predictors of lower Dyx.* Cognitive impairment,
    depression, and perceived stress will be measured by the Montreal
    Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), Patient Health Questionnaire-9, and a
    stress questionnaire.

The mentored research and structured didactics of the MSCR will prepare
me for my goal of becoming a physician-scientist. My future goals
include the pursuit of a K grant focusing on translational studies in
neurocardiology, risk stratification, and prevention. Under the guidance
of my mentorship team (Amit Shah, MD, MSCR; Alvaro Alonso, MD, PhD; Marc
Thames, MD; Viola Vaccarino, MD, PhD; Arshed Quyyumi, MD) I will gain
invaluable training in study design, primary data collection and
analysis, and be well-prepared for a career as a clinical investigator
in cardiovascular epidemiology.
