**ABSTRACT**

Ischemic heart disease (IHD) is a highly prevalent and one of the
leading causes of mortality, yet in the majority of affected
individuals, their diagnosis is not detected by clinical exam. As such,
the majority of sudden cardiac deaths occurs in those not previously
diagnosed with IHD. This suggests the need for better IHD screening
mechanisms, and a growing body of literature suggests autonomic
dysfunction may be a novel risk factor. Ambulatory electrocardiography
can be used to study autonomic dysfunction through heart rate
variability. Recently, a novel marker of heart rate variability (*Dyx*)
was found to be predictive of myocardial ischemia based on abnormal
nuclear stress test. Our group also found that low *Dyx,* when measured
in the early morning, was predictive of abnormal myocardial perfusion
imaging as well. It is not known, however, how *Dyx* correlates with
coronary angiography findings and the need for coronary intervention.
Additionally, *Dyx* is influenced by central neuropsychological
mechanisms, such as depression. Neurologic pathways may influence
coronary microvascular function and lead to ischemia even in the absence
of obstructive coronary artery disease. Assessment of depression and
cognitive impairment and their relationship with *Dyx* may help to
elucidate additional neurocardiac mechanisms on how autonomic function
may lead to adverse outcomes, even in the absence of coronary artery
disease. We will examine the relationship of neuropsychological metrics
(mood, cognitive function) and ischemic heart disease with *Dyx* to
better understand these effects in a high-risk cohort of patients with
stable angina who are undergoing cardiac catherization. Aim 1 will
evaluate the relationship of low *Dyx* with obstructive coronary artery
disease, based on cardiac catherization. Aim 2 will determine the effect
of neuropsychological pathology, as determined by depression and
cognitive impairment, on autonomic dysfunction as measured by low *Dyx*.
The goal of this study is to further evaluate the utility of *Dyx* as a
measure of autonomic dysfunction that can help risk-stratify patients
for obstructive coronary artery disease, and also determine the
influence of brain-related factors on it as well. This research will
improve our understanding of the clinical importance of disturbances of
the neurocardiac axis through a quantified measurement of autonomic
dysfunction as it relates to clinically actionable coronary artery
disease. As such, it may help to yield very important, low-cost
assessments of risk with widespread public health implications.
