SIGNIFICANCE
============

B1. Ischemic Heart Disease Remains an Under Recognized Problem
--------------------------------------------------------------

IHD accounts for in 1 in every 7 deaths in the United States, with a
prevalence of 3% or 7.9 million US adults.^1^ Over 700,000 new heart
attacks occur annually, with annual costs of heart attacks (\$12.1
billion) and IHD (\$9.0 billion) being 2 of the 10 most expensive
conditions treated in the US as of 2013. The estimated direct and
indirect costs of IHD were \$204 billion, and these medical costs are
projected to double by the year 2030.^1^ However up to 20% of MIs are
silent and up to 80% of IHD is unrecognized by standard ECG and clinical
parameters.^2^ Although there has been a decline in cardiovascular
mortality overall, the rate of out-of-hospital events has not decreased
in proportion to the rate of in-hospital events.^3^ In addition, the
majority of SCD still occur in those without previously diagnosed
IHD.^4^ The above estimates underscore the current and emerging burden
on the health care system and highlight a need for new strategies to
identify IHD and prevent its associated complications.

B2. Advances in Electrocardiography are Independent Prognostic of Cardiovascular Mortality
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Historically, abnormal HRV after MI was associated with an increased
mortality, and numerous other studies replicate its importance.^5,6^
Information contained within traditional HRV indices was thought to be
explained by heart rate itself,^7^ but newer indices may capture
additional information.^8^ A novel method for HRV analysis is through a
non-linear method named *Dyx*, which uses the multipole method in
Poincaré plots where RR intervals are plotted as a function of prior RR
intervals.^9--11^ *Dyx* reflects how one beat accelerates or decelerates
compared to the previous beat, which may more robustly signal autonomic
tone. A recent study shows that after MI, low *Dyx* had a hazard ratio
of 2.4 (CI 1.5 to 3.8) for mortality, even after adjusting for left
ventricular ejection fraction.^12^ This suggests that advanced ECG
analysis can convey information about autonomic function that is an
independent marker for cardiovascular mortality.^13^ These important
findings have helped to establish non-invasive means to measure ANS
outflow, particularly in disease states, which has spurred research in
HRV analysis. Interestingly, a recent task force noted that HRV analysis
﻿"seems to still suffer from the conceptual disconnect between clinical
cardiologists on the one side and mathematicians and engineers on the
other side."^13^ Therefore, HRV analysis in cardiovascular disease
represents an area of unmet and pressing need for translational
research, which will hopefully improve our understanding of autonomic
dysfunction and its complications.

B3. Neurovisceral Dysfunction Potentially Alters the Autonomic Nervous System
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The neurovisceral integration theory links cognitive and affective
networks to autonomic regulation.^14,15^ This framework emphasizes that
differential activation of brain structures, particularly the prefrontal
cortex, cingulate cortex, and insula, are important in autonomic
function. Maladaptive neuropsychological states, such as cognitive
impairment and depression, can thus lead to neurovisceral dysfunction,
which may alter the autonomic nervous system. Psychological stress,
including depression, leads to changes in autonomic function that have
historically known to increase to the risk of ventricular arrhythmia and
SCD,^16--18^ and may be an independent risk factor for cardiovascular
disease.^19--21^ Cognitive impairment, particularly as it relates to
executive function, is also associated with abnormal HRV, and also leads
to an increased odds of IHD independent of other cardiovascular risk
factors.^22,23^ After ischemic stroke, when HRV is measured during
cognitive performance tasks, patients with poorer performance have
simultaneous findings of abnormal HRV.^25^ These interesting findings
suggest that neurovisceral dysfunction may manifest as autonomic
dysfunction as measured by HRV. Understanding this relationship is
important because it will help identify patients at risk for
neuropsychological disease, help target treatment and interventions
early on, and may even serve as a tool to measure recovery.

B4. Clinical Implications and Utility of Measuring Autonomic Dysfunction
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Although numerous studies have suggested that autonomic dysfunction has
independent prognostic value after MI, very few studies have examined
the relationship of autonomic dysfunction preceding IHD. Traditional
methods including exercise stress testing have limited sensitivity,^32^
but advances in ECG have led to novel risk markers for IHD that are in
need of further investigation.^33,34^ Work by the lead mentor
demonstrated that frontal T axis, QT interval, and heart rate from ECG
could improve classification of the Framingham risk score by 24%,^35^
highlighting the importance of non-traditional ECG factors in risk
prediction, particularly as they are low-cost and non-invasive. There is
a single, recent study that examined *Dyx* in a moderate risk group
without known IHD, and found that low *Dyx* predicted abnormal MPI with
an improved sensitivity and specificity to exercise stress test.^33^
This applicant has shown that in a cohort of 276 individuals with no
known IHD from the Emory Twin Study, low *Dyx* in morning hours had a
12-fold increase in the odds of abnormal MPI.^36^ These findings
validate the prior work on *Dyx* but also strongly implicate the role of
the circadian rhythm in autonomic balance, highlighting the importance
of understanding HRV in the context of the time of day.^37,38^ In
preliminary analysis of this cohort, additional HRV indices were also
predictive of abnormal CAD in a subset of 31 individuals with
depression, once again supporting the need to clarify the relationship
of autonomic function within the neurocardiac axis. However, the
coronary vasodilatory agents during MPI do not cause an increase in
myocardial tissue demand nor do positive findings distinguish between
epicardial and resistance vessels. Currently, no studies have evaluated
autonomic dysfunction for its relationship to angiographic findings of
obstructive CAD. Therefore, the role of autonomic dysfunction as a
risk-stratification tool in those without known IHD represents a
pressing area for translational research before application in a
clinical context, and will help improve our understanding of
non-traditional risk-factors in the pathogenesis of IHD. As ECG testing
is readily available, measuring autonomic dysfunction as a risk-factor
for IHD may help reduce the burden to the health-care system and allow
for early intervention.

 
-
