**C. INNOVATION**

The major innovation in this proposal is that a low-cost ECG-based
measure (*Dyx*) will provide a robust measure of autonomic regulation in
disturbances of the neurocardiac axis. *Dyx* is an innovative, novel
measure and has advantages to other HRV indices. We include the effect
of time of day, unlike prior studies, as *Dyx* follows a circadian
pattern. This tool, as it is ECG-based, will have a low barrier to
wide-spread implementation. The data for this study can also be
collected non-invasively, using the Biostamp patch, and the generation
of the *Dyx* index can be performed by current commercial technology
(HeartTrends algorithm). Overall, *Dyx* will serve as a better clinical
tool for risk prediction for IHD as well as a better research tool in
understanding autonomic mechanisms in IHD.

Autonomic dysfunction, measured by abnormal HRV, has not yet been used
as a clinical tool to stratify patients at risk for developing IHD. This
project not only studies a novel, non-linear HRV index *Dyx*, it
advances the field by correlating HRV with coronary angiography
findings. Currently, risk-stratification for IHD is based on traditional
risk factors, such as the Framingham risk score, and other well-known
contributors to cardiovascular disease. Although *Dyx* is an independent
prognostic marker,^1^ we can evaluate its diagnostic utility in IHD.
Other older HRV indices, such as geometric and frequency domain, are
less prognostic for cardiovascular mortality and are not successful at
predicting IHD.

Our approach also allows us to look at the effects of brain-correlates
on autonomic function using a quantifiable measure. There are many
studies that demonstrate psychological factors can increase cardiac
risk,^2,3^ such as through ventricular arrhythmia, but there are no
readily-available tools to study the underlying mechanism. *Dyx*, which
has not yet been studied, shows promise as a more robust HRV index and
future work will help to identify directionality and causality.
