D. APPROACH
===========

DX. Study Overview
------------------

![](media/image1.tiff){width="1.475in" height="2.2375in"}

This training grant proposes an ancillary study on an ongoing
prospective registry of patients undergoing cardiac catherization, the
Emory Cardiovascular Biobank (EmCAB) ﻿which was established to identify
novel factors associated with the pathobiological process and treatment
of cardiovascular disease.^1^ The EmCAB is enriched for patients with
high suspicion for obstructive CAD, which provides ample statistical
power for studies of risk prediction, and is led by one of the advisors,
Dr. Arshed Quyyumi, and has been studied before by the mentoring team.
The registry has over 7000 unique patients from three Emory Healthcare
sites in Atlanta (Emory University Hospital, Grady Memorial Hospital,
and Emory Midtown Hospital) and is supported by the Woodruff Foundation
at Emory University, several NIH and other grants. The EmCAB has ongoing
enrollment (10-20 patients per week), with established facilities,
staff, and data collection mechanisms in place, and has IRB approval for
future research that includes analysis of de-identified data. The EmCAB
continues to consent and enroll over 40 patients per month, allowing
this applicant to collect novel data. **Figure 1** shows an overview of
the proposed aims. The proposed research will fund my training to obtain
and analyze ECG data specific to autonomic function (through HRV
indices), collect and interpret questionnaire-based data on depression,
stress, and cognitive impairment, and gain proficiency in the
statistical analysis.

DX. Study Population
====================

The EmCAB has had approximately 3000 major cardiovascular events thus
far, and has had multiple studies that have identified additional
predictive factors for cardiovascular disease outcomes, including
protein biomarkers, oxidative stress markers, circulating progenitor
cells, and inflammatory markers that may improve risk prediction beyond
traditional risk factors. Participants are interviewed to collect
demographic, medical history, family history, medication usage, health
behaviors, psychological factors, cognitive impairment, and
neuropsychological functioning prior to cardiac catherization. All
patients aged 18 years and older undergoing cardiac catherization at the
three listed Emory Healthcare sites are asked to participate. ﻿Patients
are excluded if they have congenital heart disease, severe valvular
heart disease, severe anemia, a recent blood transfusion, myocarditis,
history of active inflammatory disease, cancer or are unable or not
willing to provide consent (approximately 5%). We will specifically
evaluate subjects who are clinical stable, and exclude those with acute
coronary syndrome.

DX. Research Design
-------------------

[General Protocol]{.underline}: The enrollment, consent, and detailed
phenotyping of the patients has been described in multiple prior studies
using the EmCAB.^1^ ﻿Patients are enrolled and interviewed by study
staff on the same day of their cardiac catheterizations, with most
interviews occurring prior to catheterization. Other measures, including
lifestyle factors, medical comorbidities, revascularization during the
index cardiac catheterization, and previous revascularization procedures
are ascertained via patient interview and chart review. The sample for
study will be collected daily over the course of the first several
months of this study, with an estimated 20 patients enrolled per week.
Coronary angiographies will be evaluated by visual estimation of luminal
narrowing in multiple segments based on a modified form of the American
Heart Association classification of the coronary tree by trained
cardiologists. Semi-quantitative angiographic scoring will be performed
using the Gensini score, which quantifies CAD severity by a non-linear
points system for degree of luminal narrowing weighted by a multiplier
for specific anatomical locations of any lesions.

[Heart Rate Variability]{.underline}: This study will add HRV to the
data collected by the EmCAB. We will use non-invasive, continuous,
ambulatory ECG patches (Biostamp®, MC10 Inc), which we have acquired
through my mentor Dr. Shah, for the collection of time series data of RR
intervals for further analysis. I will assist with the consent and
incorporation of the additional ECG data collection into the larger
study protocol. The consent will occur in the early AM (7AM-9 AM), after
which the patch will be applied until their angiogram. This follows from
our recent ![](media/image2.jpeg){width="2.3159722222222223in"
height="1.7868055555555555in"}findings that the most important time for
detecting autonomic dysfunction is between 7 AM and 10 AM.^2^ If
possible, however, additional data will be collected. We will use the
commercial HeartTrends algorithm (Lev-El Diagnostics Ltd., Israel) to
generate the *Dyx* measure, as well as an internally developed HRV
analysis toolbox to generate additional HRV indices for comparison.^3^
The HRV toolbox was developed here at Emory with consultation from the
Dr. Shah, due to his expertise in ECG measures of autonomic dysfunction.

[Neuropsychological Measures]{.underline}: As describe, the enrollment
protocol includes patient interviews by study staff. Depressive symptoms
will be assessed via the 9-question Primary Care Evaluation of Mental
Disorders Brief Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9).^4^ Moderate
depression is seen at a cutoff of 10 points or higher (out of 27), which
has a sensitivity and specificity of 88% for major depression.^5^ In
addition, questionnaires are included on perceived life stress and
chronic burden. Cognitive impairment will be measured using the Montreal
cognitive assessment (MOCA), which is a measure of global cognitive
function and is comprised of the sub-domains: memory, visuospatial
function, executive function, sustained attention, language, and
orientation. The MOCA has a sensitivity of 90% and specificity of 87%
for detecting mild cognitive impairment (MCI) using a cutoff score of 26
(out of 30).^6^

[Power Calculation]{.underline}: The expected cohort size from this
ancillary study is 150 patients, which we should be able to collect over
the course of 6 months. We anticipate a maximum of 20% loss of data due
to poor ECG quality (\>20% artifact), missing data, or other exclusion
criteria as above. After these reductions we estimate a sample size of
120 patients. Using α=0.05, and 1-β=0.80, we would have the power to
detect a different of magnitude as small as Cohen's d=0.32. The
preliminary data from the Emory Twin Study, and based on the increased
event rate in the EmCAB, this minimum magnitude of difference will
likely be surpassed for most analyses.

**DX. Specific Aim \#1:** To evaluate the relationship of abnormal HRV
during morning hours with obstructive CAD.

[Rationale]{.underline}: Abnormal HRV indicates autonomic dysfunction,
and increases the risk of cardiovascular mortality. *Dyx* has been shown
to predict myocardial perfusion defects during stress test. Our previous
work suggests this finding is most robust during morning hours.^2^ We
are looking to, for the first time, evaluate *Dyx* during morning hours
and the relationship between angiographic findings of obstructive CAD.

[Data Collection and Analysis]{.underline}: I will be directly involved
with the study coordinators to enroll patients and help consent for the
use of ambulatory ECG. I will be responsible for working with the
BioStamp company for the extraction of ECG data into usable RR intervals
and evaluation for arrhythmia (which would be excluded from analysis). I
will also communicate with the HeartTrends company to ensure appropriate
and timely generation of the *Dyx* index. The algorithm uses the
multipole method of HRV analysis through Poincaré plots, in which RR
intervals are plotted as a function of prior RR
![](media/image3.jpeg){width="3.9in"
height="2.3645833333333335in"}intervals as seen in **Figure 2**.^7,8^ I
will learn to use the HRV toolbox under the guidance of Dr. Shah to
generate frequency and geometric domain indices of HRV, which is
critical for my training to familiarize myself with the mathematical
principles and technical skills underlying signal processing. ^3^ All
HRV indices will be generated for each hour for comparison. I will
compare the exposure of HRV indices to the outcome of the presence of
obstructive CAD (stenosis \>=70%) on cardiac catherization using
logistic regression models, with multivariate analysis to evaluate the
performance of HRV against traditional risk factors. I will perform
these analyses independently, under the guidance of Dr. Alonso and Dr.
Shah, to help apply the biostatistics skills strengthened by formal
coursework during the MSCR.

[Potential Problems and Solutions]{.underline}: This patient population
is likely to have a higher proportion of patients on beta-blockers,
which has a known effect on heart rate and spectral HRV.^9^ For patients
on beta-blocker therapy in an additional subgroup analysis to prevent
confounding of the results. Continuous ECG data are susceptible to
artifact, which may lead to erroneous data. Such data can be edited to
remove noise and ectopy, and interpolated to fill gaps, which existing
software techniques allow for the easy cleaning of raw RR interval data.

[Anticipated Results]{.underline}: We expect to find an independent
association with autonomic dysfunction in the morning hours, measured by
low *Dyx*, with obstructive coronary artery disease (stenosis \>= 70%).

**DX. Specific Aim \#2:** To determine the effect of depressive symptoms
and stress on autonomic dysfunction.

[Rationale]{.underline}: Depression is common in patients with CAD, and
is an independent risk factor for increased mortality after MI.^10^
Psychological stress, including depression, is well known to lead to
increased risk of SCD.^11^ We found in preliminary analysis that in a
cohort from the Emory Twin Study that *Dyx* had a robust association
with depressive symptoms. We also found in preliminary analysis that in
a cohort from the Atherosclerotic Risk In Communities Study other
psychological life stressors, such as exhaustion, were associated with
abnormal HRV. We will look to elucidate the relationship and effect size
of depression and stress with autonomic dysfunction through *Dyx.*

[Data Collection and Analysis]{.underline}: The primary exposures will
be depressive symptoms and stress. The primary outcome will be autonomic
function, measured by *Dyx* and other HRV indices. I will create linear
regression models for the continuous *Dyx* measure, and logistic
regressions for *Dyx* using the previously established cutoff of \<2
units. As in **Aim \#1**, I will also create models that adjust for
cardiovascular risk factors, with additional focus on age and gender due
to their impact on depression and HRV. As part of my training, I will
also use structured equation modeling to help quantify effect size and
the influence of other comorbid conditions, which I will learn to
interpret and model through advanced biostatistics coursework and
independent study through the MSCR.

[Potential Problems]{.underline}: As patients are undergoing cardiac
catherization, some patients may have acute reasons for presentation,
for which the PHQ-9 is not validated. We will exclude patients with a
diagnosis of acute MI for that reason. Treatment of depression may lead
to favorable changes to autonomic function, and thus antidepressant use
may affect HRV. We will control for antidepressant use through
additional subgroup analysis.

[Anticipated Results]{.underline}: We expect that depressive symptoms
and psychological stress independently associate with autonomic
dysfunction, measured by low *Dyx*. We expect that this finding will be
more robust than in other HRV measures.

**DX. Specific Aim \#3:** To explore the relationship of cognitive
impairment on autonomic dysfunction.

[Rationale]{.underline}: There is an increased odds of developing
cognitive impairment in IHD which is independent of cardiovascular risk
factors. ^12^ HRV has been seen to independently associate with changes
in cognitive function, even after adjustment for traditional risk
factors.^13^ The increased risk may be mediated through autonomic
dysfunction, and for the first time, we will look to identify the
relationship of *Dyx* with cognitive impairment

[Data Collection and Analysis]{.underline}: The primary exposure will be
cognitive impairment per the MOCA, broken into its subdomains. The
primary outcome will be autonomic function, measured by *Dyx,* along
with other traditional HRV indices. Linear and logistic regression
models will be used as described in **Aim \#2**. Multivariable models
will be adjusted for cardiovascular risk factors. I will analyze the
MOCA by its subdomains in addition, as these may have different effects
on autonomic function.

[Potential Problems and Solutions]{.underline}: The generalizability of
this data will be made complex as patients with more severe cognitive
impairment may not be referred for catherization, and thus excluded from
the study. This data will also be complicated by patients with
preexisting cerebrovascular disease. To control for this, we will
exclude patients that have known strokes.

[Anticipated Results]{.underline}: We expect that lower MOCA scores,
suggesting cognitive impairment, will independently associate with
autonomic dysfunction, measured by low *Dyx*, and the association will
be more robust than with other HRV measures.

DX. Mentorship and Training Integration
---------------------------------------

The combination of direct human research experience (including patient
enrollment and study design), statistical analyses and management of
data, dedicated course work through the MSCR, and the clinical training
from his residency are integral to building my foundation as a
physician-scientist. Dr. Shah has an expertise in ECG signal processing
and psychosocial stress, and has been a dedicated mentor for the past
three years. We will have frequent in-person and phone meetings, and he
will provide guidance on data measurement, analysis, and interpretation
of HRV data. Dr. Alonso studies the effect of neurocognitive factors on
arrhythmia risk, and is an investigator in a large clinical cohort, the
Atherosclerotic Risk In Communities study (ARIC). We will meet in-person
on a biweekly basis, where he will provide guidance on study design and
data interpretation as it relates to neurocognitive impairment, as well
as direction on statistical analysis. Dr. Thames is a senior
cardiologist with extensive research into the cardiac autonomic nervous
system. He has provided expert insight into mechanisms and pathways in
prior manuscripts, and will continue to teach me the interpretation of
translational research in cardiac autonomic function. Dr. Vaccarino, as
the head of the Emory Program in Cardiovascular Outcomes Research and
Epidemiology (EPICORE) and T32 program, conducts biweekly meetings that
I will participate in, allowing me to share my work, meet with other
trainees, and attend seminars by invited speakers on cardiovascular
disease epidemiology and health disparities. I will also participate in
dedicated teaching programs in vascular biology and biostatistics as a
trainee in EPICORE. She will also provide feedback on manuscript
drafting focused on epidemiology and biostatistics concepts. Dr. Quyyumi
is the lead investigator of the EmCAB and has participated in a number
of clinical trials. He will help me integrate this new HRV component
into the EmCAB, giving me guidance on the practical steps needed to
modify and design a clinical study. He will also provide feedback on
manuscript drafting with a focus on translational and clinical aspects.
Certain skills gained through the MSCR curriculum will be foundational
to my success as a researcher. Of note, the *MSCR 594 Scientific and
Grant Writing* will help as I prepare to apply for my first K grant in
preventive cardiology. With my background in programming, particularly
the statistical language R, the basic and advanced biostatistics courses
including *MSCR 534 Analytic Methods for Clinical and Translational
Research* *and MSCR 596 Advanced Data Management in R* will help
formalize and enhance my ability to become an independent researcher.

DX. Timeline
------------

This research proposal is intended to allow for completion of several
projects over the course of the upcoming academic year, from July 2019
to June 2020. The applicant will spend 35-45% of his time completing
academic coursework for the MSCR, including additional classes and
seminars in advanced biostatistics and statistical programming
languages. The applicant expects to split his remaining time between
implementation of the proposed study protocol, including enrollment,
data collection, and study design, and primary data analysis. No
clinical work will be assigned. As the applicant has worked with Dr.
Shah and the Rollins School of Public Health extensively over the past 3
years, he intends to start working with the EmCAB coordinators, the MC10
BioStamp company, and the HeartTrends group starting in April 2019 to
facilitate a productive research year. In the spring of 2020, the
applicant intends to use part of his time for the preparation of
manuscripts to be submitted, along with grant proposals for future
studies. This applicant is considering a career in academic cardiology,
and will reach out to other faculty and researchers to gain additional
training for future research throughout fellowship.

DX. Future Directions
---------------------

We expect to find a clinically meaningful (risk ratio \>2) association
with the non-linear HRV index, *Dyx*, and obstructive CAD, highlighting
the utility of autonomic dysfunction as an independent risk factor for
CAD. I also expect to find an independent association of *Dyx* with
depression, stress, and neurocognitive impairment, demonstrating its
role in quantifying neurocardiac health, and highlighting the importance
of the brain in this relationship. In the future, I hope to use this
research as the basis for screening for autonomic dysfunction using ECG
to identify those at risk for obstructive CAD, as well as understanding
the heart-brain mechanisms better. Future grants would further elaborate
on this work with larger sample sizes, clinical outcomes, and additional
mechanisms such as inflammation. I also plan on using HRV as a tool to
research the effects of neuropsychological factors on cardiovascular
disease risk, such as directionality and effect size, with the intent to
eventually direct interventions that may be protective.

**REFERENCES**

1\. Ko YA, Hayek S, Sandesara P, Samman Tahhan A, Quyyumi A. Cohort
profile: The Emory Cardiovascular Biobank (EmCAB). *BMJ Open*.
2017;7(12):e018753. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-0187532. Shah A, Lampert R,
Goldberg J, Bremner JD, Vaccarino V, Shah A. Abstract 15216: Circadian
Autonomic Inflexibility: A Marker of Ischemic Heart Disease. In:
*Circulation*. Vol 138. American Heart Association; 2018:A15216-A15216.
doi:10.1161/circ.138.suppl\_1.152163. Vest AN, Da Poian G, Li Q, et al.
An open source benchmarked toolbox for cardiovascular waveform and
interval analysis. *Physiol Meas*. 2018;39(10):105004.
doi:10.1088/1361-6579/aae0214. Spitzer RL. Validation and Utility of a
Self-report Version of PRIME-MD: The PHQ Primary Care Study. *JAMA*.
1999;282(18):1737. doi:10.1001/jama.282.18.17375. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL,
Williams JB. The PHQ-9: validity of a brief depression severity measure.
*J Gen Intern Med*. 2001;16(9):606-613.6. Nasreddine ZS, Phillips NA,
Bédirian V, et al. The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: a brief
screening tool for mild cognitive impairment. *J Am Geriatr Soc*.
2005;53(4):695-699. doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2005.53221.x7. Tayel M,
AlSaba E. Poincaré Plot for Heart Rate Variability. *Int J Medical, Heal
Biomed Bioeng Pharm Eng*. 2015;9(9):708-711.8. Olesen RM, Bloch Thomsen
PE, Saermark K, et al. Statistical analysis of the DIAMOND MI study by
the multipole method. *Physiol Meas*. 2005;26(5):591-598.
doi:10.1088/0967-3334/26/5/0029. Sandrone G, Mortara A, Torzillo D, La
Rovere MT, Malliani A, Lombardi F. Effects of beta blockers (atenolol or
metoprolol) on heart rate variability after acute myocardial infarction.
*Am J Cardiol*. 1994;74(4):340-345. doi:10.1016/0002-9149(94)90400-610.
Smolderen KG, Buchanan DM, Gosch K, et al. Depression Treatment and
1-Year Mortality after Acute Myocardial Infarction: Insights from the
TRIUMPH Registry (Translational Research Investigating Underlying
Disparities in Acute Myocardial Infarction Patients' Health Status).
*Circulation*. 2017;135(18):1681-1689.
doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.02514011. Lown B. Sudden cardiac death
\-- 1978. *Circulation*. 1979;60(7):1593-1599.
doi:10.1161/01.CIR.60.7.159312. Deckers K, Schievink SHJ, Rodriquez MMF,
et al. Coronary heart disease and risk for cognitive impairment or
dementia: Systematic review and meta-analysis. *PLoS One*. 2017;12(9).
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.018424413. Zeki Al Hazzouri A, Elfassy T,
Carnethon MR, Lloyd-Jones DM, Yaffe K. Heart Rate Variability and
Cognitive Function in Middle-Age Adults: The Coronary Artery Risk
Development in Young Adults. *Am J Hypertens*. 2018;31(1):27-34.
doi:10.1093/ajh/hpx125
