March 15, 2019

Georgia Clinical & Translational Science Alliance: TL1 Program

Emory University

Dear Committee Members,

I write to convey overwhelming enthusiasm and support for Anish Shah, MD
as a candidate for the 2019 TL1 Program and the Masters of Science in
Clinical Research. As the Program Director for the J. Willis Internal
Medicine Residency Program, I have witnessed Anish's exponential growth
and early commitment to both patient care and clinical investigation
thus far in his internal medicine residency training. Myself and the
program deeply believe that Anish has the compassion, academic
curiosity, perseverance, and enthusiasm to have an exponential
trajectory as a clinical investigator.

Anish completed a Bachelor of Science in Neuroscience & Behavioral
Biology, with a second major in Linguistics, at Emory University in
2011. He developed his initial interest in research at that time in the
field of linguistics, and began to gain programming and statistical
skills. He continued to grow his research skills during his time at
Texas A&M University College of Medicine, learning data collection and
statistical analysis techniques which culminated in a research project
that was presented internationally, at the Canadian Association of
Pediatric Surgeons. He then returned to Emory University School of
Medicine for his training in internal medicine in July of 2016.

During his residency, he has excelled in his clinical rotations and
received outstanding feedback on his performance. On his most recent
wards month at Grady Memorial Hospital, his attending Dr. Anna Kho noted
that "Dr. Shah was by far one of the BEST residents that I have ever
worked with in my entire career...While everything that I\'ve written so
far is what\'s normally expected of residents, I will tell you that my
month with Dr. Shah has been even better than months where I\'ve worked
with former chief residents." During his last rotation in the intensive
care unit, his attending Dr. Sushma Cribbs noted that he "managed the
team well (almost at the level of a fellow), always making sure patients
were seen, new patients were taken care, transfers were handled." It is
remarkable that during this time, he has also excelled in several
professional extracurricular activities. Anish participated in the
Distinction in Teaching and Leadership, giving lectures on teaching
theory, multiple oral *bite-sized teaching* presentations (including at
the regional Southern Hospital Medicine conference), and has coached
interns in giving similar talks. He has also been active in developing
the point-of-care ultrasonography curriculum with one of our teaching
faculty, Dr. Mikhail Akbashev, including independent medical education
research on the utility of cardiovascular point-of-care sonography, and
is currently writing a manuscript with his results. This serves as an
example of how Anish has gone above-and-beyond in multiple arenas of his
training, which reflects how I expect he will excel in academic medicine
as a physician, researcher, and teacher.

Anish developed a keen interest in the autonomic nervous system and
cardiovascular risk after entering residency, and joined the laboratory
of Dr. Amit Shah, an academic cardiologist and Assistant Professor of
Epidemiology at the Rollins School of Public Health. Anish's research
focuses on heart rate variability, psychological stress, and ischemic
heart disease, during which time he has gained valuable experience in
programming and biostatistics, along with an increasing understanding of
pathology of the autonomic nervous system. Myself, his advisor Dr.
Daniel Dressler, and the residency program are all particularly proud of
his scholastic achievements, and have gladly supported him in presenting
at multiple local, regional, and national conferences. Most recently, he
presented at the national level at the American Heart Association
Scientific Sessions 2018 in Chicago, where his work was highlighted as
one of the two top-rated research posters of the event. He has taken the
next step by submitting a manuscript of his work as first author,
"Circadian Changes in Heart Rate Variability Predict Abnormal Myocardial
Perfusion", currently under review. The mentorship he has received is
distinctive, as I personally have seen the commitment Dr. Amit Shah has
shown to Anish throughout his training thus far, from attending . He
also has continued to work under the auspices of the Emory Program In
Cardiovascular Outcomes Research and Epidemiology at Rollins,
establishing relationships with additional mentors, including Dr. Viola
Vaccarino on his latest manuscript and a review article on brain-heart
interactions for *Hypertension*, and Dr. Alonso Alvaro on his work on
heart rate variability and psychological stress with the Atherosclerotic
Risk in Communities Study. This spring, as a capstone to his training,
Anish presented his Senior Grand Rounds on sudden cardiac death and the
autonomic nervous system. This thoughtful lecture was well-received and
exemplifies how he has grown as an academic physician during his
training. More so, his mentor for this talk, Dr. Marc Thames, invited
him to expand on his presentation by writing a review article on cardiac
sympathetic innervation. These examples showcase how Anish has
demonstrated an eagerness and willingness to pursue clinical questions,
and has developed relationships with faculty mentors that all are
encouraging his continued growth as a clinical researcher.

As I have seen Anish grow and evolve to become a stellar senior
resident, it is without any hesitation that I can say that he has
tremendous potential to be a successful clinical researcher. Two of his
closest clinical mentors, Dr. Daniel Dressler and Dr. Amit Shah, have
both completed the MSCR here at Emory as part of their training, and as
such I can be sure that this is the correct path forward for Anish. I
know that he will continue his current research, expanding upon it
through his TL1 year, and that the formal instruction of the MSCR
program will enhance his growing skillset. As you can see from his
application, Anish has developed relationships with a robust team of
mentors who have established themselves as role-models of clinical and
translational investigators in various stages of their career, all of
whom are dedicated to his success.

In summary, I truly believe that Anish is an excellent candidate for the
MSCR and TL1 program. In the upcoming year, I'm sure that he will be an
enthusiastic and disciplined student and have the capacity and support
to meet his research goals. He has the intellectual curiosity, technical
skills, and perseverance to become an outstanding clinician-scientist,
and will grow exponentially through formal didactics and continued
mentorship. Anish has my highest recommendation, and I give my strongest
support for his acceptance into the program. Please do not hesitate to
contact me with any questions.

Sincerely,

Karen Law, MD

Program Director, J. Willis Hurst Internal Medicine Residency\
Associate Vice Chair of Education, Department of Medicine\
Emory University School of Medicine

404-686-8339

<kllaw@emory.edu>
