![](media/image1.jpeg){width="2.03125in" height="1.4861111111111112in"}

March 12, 2019

Dear Review Committee,

It is with great enthusiasm that I write this letter in support of Anish
Shah's TL1 application to evaluate the cardiac and neuropsychiatric
correlates of heart rate variability in the Emory Biobank Study. I am
excited to work with him on this project as his Co-Lead mentor with
Alvaro Alonso, my colleague, office neighbor, and friend. Anish is a
truly exceptional applicant, beyond what could be appreciated from his
paper representation. His energy, diligence, and quantitive skills are
truly exceptional, and will carry him far as he completes his MSCR
coursework and conducts investigations as outlined in this grant.

We first met 3 years ago when he was an intern who was open to a number
of possibilities in research. He was unique in that he had a special
skill and interest in computer science, and could understand advanced
concepts in mathematics. It is rare to find someone in cardiology with
both clinical and engineering skills such as Anish. This aligned well
with my work, and we quickly started on an interesting analysis on the
Emory Twins Data that evaluated the relationship of autonomic function
and ischemic heart disease (that was the foundation for the current
proposal). Anish performed a rigorous analysis in R independently that
was presented at the 2018 American Heart Association meeting, and was
chosen by the AHA to be one of two posters that were highlighted for the
donor luncheon based on its real-world relevance and impact on science.
Clearly his work was making a difference, and he was just getting
started.

While his previous experience was limited without any protected time for
research, he is hopefully on the cusp of his first peer-reviewed
original manuscript (currently under review). While this provides
limited data for Anish to produce, with a year dedicated to research and
training in the MSCR, I have no doubt he will be extremely productive,
and that this program will catapult his career as a clinical
investigator.

Although I am relatively early in my career as an Assistant Professor in
Epidemiology (since 2013), I have been able to successfully leverage
several funding mechanisms to build a multidisciplinary team that
investigates the heart-brain relationship with novel alogrithms and
wearables. It will be the perfect fit for Anish's proposed training and
research plan. Not only have I been funded through NIH mechanisms (K23
HL127251), but also the American Heart Association (Scientist
Development Grant, PI), Emory Synergy award mechanism as lead PI (2
separate awards), Coulter foundation (contact PI), VA Center for
Innovations (PI), and Georgia Research Alliance (contact PI). Based on
this support, I have been able to build a team that consists of study
coordinators, regulatory specialists, data managers, and engineers.
Furthermore, I have been able to leverage my strong relationship with
Viola Vaccarino and others in the Emory Program for Outcomes Research
and Epidemiology (EPICORE) to build a synergistic multidisciplinary
program of epidemiologists, engineers, mental health specialists,
cardiologists, and imaging researchers. Furthermore, my work with Dr.
Quyyumi on my K23 award and recently completed program project grant on
mental stress ischemia (P01 HL101398) also increased my involvement and
presence with the Emory Clinical Cardiovascular Research Institute
(ECCRI), where we are actively working projects involving the evaluation
of mechanisms relating acute stress and ischemic heart disease.

I look forward to meeting with Anish regularly and support his project
needs with the infrastructure that I have created with multiple funding
sources. In our weekly meetings, I look forward to discussing with him
several aspects of his training and research plan, and working with him
to discuss issues as they arise. Together we will review all aspects
related to training for research. This includes primary data collection,
data analysis, interpretation of findings, writing manuscripts, and
presenting his work at national meetings. Furthermore, I will guide him
towards appropriate training and research opportunities as they arise,
and hold him accountable with a goal of submitting 2 first-author
publications by the time he is finished with his research year.

My work with his mentoring team is extensive. Both Dr. Alonso and I
share a passion for cardiac epidemiology, arrhythmia, and the
brain-heart relationship. In the past 2 years since he arrived at Emory,
we have already written 2 papers together (one published, another under
review), gained funding for an R01 award together (PI Alonso, R01
HL137338), applied for 2 large center grants together, and mentored
several students together. He is an ideal co-lead mentor for Anish given
his expertise in cardiovascular epidemiology and translational research,
status as a internationally recognized, tenured researcher with
independent funding, close relationship with me, dedication to
mentoring, and extensive network of contacts that could offer additional
support for Anish if needed.

Dr. Thames and I also share a strong interest together on autonomic
function as it relates to ischemic heart disease. He and I are both on
Anish's paper evaluating *Dyx* as an independent marker of ischemia in
the Emory Twins Studies. It has been a pleasuring working with him, and
I look forward to continue doing so as we move forward with Anish's
postdoctoral training.

In summary, I am more than happy to recommend Anish for this application
and work as his co-lead mentor. Despite being early in his career, he
displays incredible talent and promise. His large mentoring team will
also add greatly to his expertise and foundations in research. I
appreciate your consideration of his application and look forward to
supporting his research career.

Best regards,

![](media/image2.png){width="1.7083333333333333in"
height="0.3854166666666667in"}

Amit Shah, MD, MSCR

Assistant Professor, Department of Epidemiology

Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University

Adjunct Assistant Professor, Department of Medicine, Division of
Cardiology

Emory University School of Medicine

Staff Physician, Division of Cardiology

Atlanta Veterans Affairs Medical Center

List of Previous Trainees Mentored or Co-mentored (table)

  Trainee            Start Date   Summary of Support During Training   Terminal Degree(s) Received and Year(s)   Topic of Research Project                             Initial Position Department Institution Activity   Current Position Department Institution Activity
  ------------------ ------------ ------------------------------------ ----------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
  Reinersten, Erik   7/1/15       MD-PhD Program                       BA, 2013                                  Classification of mental health disorders             MD/PhD Student, Emory U.                           MD/PhD Student, Emory U.
  Ayse Cakmak        7/1/17       NIH U award (AURORA)                 BA, 2015                                  Classification of Sleep in Heart Failure              PhD student, GT                                    PhD student, GT
  Ismail Sadiq       7/1/18       NIH K23 award (PI Shah)              BA, 2014                                  Classification of Morphological Variability in PTSD   PhD student, GT                                    PhD student, GT
  Giulia Da Poian    9/1/17       NIH R01                              PhD, 2016                                 Autonomic Function and Sleep in PTSD                  Postdoctoral fellow, Emory                         Postdoctoral fellow, Emory
  Jay Khambati       9/1/18       VA Scholars Program                  MD, 2016                                  Quality improvement in cardiac rehabilitation         VA Postdoctoral Fellow                             VA Postdoctoral Fellow
  Elliot Mahlof      9/1/18       VA Scholars Program                  MD, 2016                                  Quality improvement in cardiac rehabilitation         VA Postdoctoral Fellow                             VA Postdoctoral Fellow
  Arash Harzand      7/1/16       GME                                  MD, 2013                                  Smartphone Enabled Exercise Therapy in CVD            VA Postdoctoral Fellow                             Assistant Professor, Emory University
  Nil Gurel          7/1/17       DARPA                                PhD, 2015                                 Noninvasive vagal nerve stimulation in PTSD           PhD student, GT                                    PhD student, GT
  Nino Isakadze      7/1/16       GME                                  MD, 2015                                  Atiral Fibrillation and depression                    Medical resident, Emory                            Postdoctoral fellow, Johns Hopkins University
  Senbeta Guteta     7/1/17       MEPI program                         MD, 2001                                  Diabetes and Risk of Heart Failure                    Assitant Professor                                 Associate Professor
  Aaron Trammell     3/15/16      Self-funded                          MD, 2008                                  Pulmonary Hypertension and Prognosis                  Assitant Professor                                 Assistant Professor, Emory University
