March 15, 2019

Georgia Clinical & Translational Science Alliance: TL1 Program

Emory University

Dear Committee Members,

I am pleased to write you to support Anish Shah, MD for his application
for the TL1 award. I am enthusiastic about serving as an advisor for him
as a part of his mentoring team. I met Anish in 2018 as he began his
first manuscript on autonomic dysfunction, and am most impressed by his
potential to become an outstanding clinical researcher in the field of
neurocardiology and epidemiology. He has a distinct passion for studying
the autonomic nervous system, understanding mechanisms, and has grown
tremendously in the short time that I have known him. I believe that his
completion of the TL1 and Master of Science in Clinical Research will be
fundamental on his accelerated path towards becoming a clinical
researcher.

\[Thames training overview from NIH biosketch\]

I have worked on several projects with Anish, including his most recent
paper under review on heart rate variability (HRV) and myocardial
perfusion imaging (MPI) abnormalities. He demonstrated that a marker of
autonomic function, heart rate variability, was able to predict those at
risk for abnormal myocardial perfusion imaging, and that the finding is
most prominent in the early morning hours. The complex math behind
generating the *Dyx* variable is conceptually intriguing, as it seems to
capture additional information about sympathovagal balance that was less
measurable with traditional HRV. Noteworthy is that Anish has a
familiarity with the mathematical concepts at play due to his background
in computer science, which places him in the rare position of being able
to find clinical meaning in the mathetmatical abstractions he is
studying. His paper is hypothesis-generating, as now we are faced with
the question of whether the abnormal coronary blood flow occurred from
epicardial vessels or microvascular resistance vessels, as there is a
certain false positive rate with MPI and it is unknown how coronary
angiography compares. I have talked with Anish about this specifically
on multiple occasions, and helped him refine a pointed research question
that is a central part of his upcoming research proposal.

His current research proposal is to look at a unique and relatively new
HRV measure named *Dyx* and how it relates to the neurocardiac axis. He
will look at cardiac catherization data in an ongoing study at Emory and
see if *Dyx* will be predictive of the amount of stenosis. Although
epicardial disease is the expected result, a negative finding would be
mechanistically very interesting and thus a high-yield hypothesis to
explore. I have extensively published in the field of neurocardiology,
with an expertise in autonomic innervation of the heart through study of
canine models, as a basic scientist and cardiologist. Thus, I am
well-suited to serve as his advisor and can guide him in his
understanding and interpretation of his findings at a mechanisms level.
As part of his mentoring team, I provide a unique perspective that has
already shown to be quite helpful in his current work, his academic
development, and I suspect that it will continue.

Anish recently gave his senior lecture on sudden cardiac death and the
autonomic nervous system, for which I served as a mentor. It was quite
well-received. He shows such promise and growing knowledge in the field
that I asked him to write a clinical review article on the sympathetic
efferent innervation of the heart, which he is currently working on. Not
only is the topic clinically relevant and timely, I think it will
improve Anish's overall understanding of the field at an anatomic and
physiologic level. Co-authors on this paper are other clinicians with an
interest in the neurocardiac axis, including Amit Shah, MD, MSCR, who is
the co-lead mentor for Anish on this grant application. Our continual
collaboration on his prior work on *Dyx*, this review article, and the
upcoming research project are examples of how the mentoring team I think
have and will serve for his academic growth.

His current grant proposal also looks at the neurocardiac axis from
another direction, the relationship of the autonomic nervous system and
psychological factors. This topic is of interest as it begins to answer
a well-posed question by a the researcher Douglas Zipes ---Â "Why did he
die on a Tuesday and not on a Monday?" Understanding how
neuropsychiatric disorders change autonomic tone, change ventricular
fibrillatory threshold, and lead to sudden death are burning topics. By
measuring *Dyx*, we will add a non-invasive measure of autonomic tone
that can help quantify these relationships.

In summary, I support Dr. Anish Shah in his application for the TL1
award. He will benefit tremendously not only from the protected research
time, but also developing his background in computer programming and
statistics through formal training with the MSCR. As his advisor for
this grant, we will plan to meet in-person monthly to review his work
and progress, with a particular focusing on mechanisms and
interpretation. We will also interact through e-mail and phone as
questions arise. I will also provide routine critical feedback in the
manuscript drafting process. I have no reservations about Anish's
success this upcoming year. He has my highest recommendations as a young
and promising clinical researcher.

Sincerely,

Marc D. Thames, MD

Assistant Professor

Division of Cardiology

Emory University

<marc.thames@emory.edu>
