![page1image7965536](media/image1.jpeg){width="6.630666010498688in"
height="1.3364490376202975in"}

March 11, 2019

Georgia Clinical & Translational Science Alliance: TL1 Program

Emory University

Dear Committee Members,

It is with the greatest enthusiasm that I write to offer my support for
Anish Shah's submission for the TL1 Award as a Co-Lead mentor. Anish is
a remarkably bright, engaging, and enthusiastic individual who has
demonstrated the potential to become an outstanding clinical researcher.
He joined Emory for his internal medicine residency training in 2016,
and has excelled as a clinician, and has continued to work with the
Department of Epidemiology here at Rollins School of Public Health. He
has shown a specific passion in cardiovascular epidemiology, with a
focus on autonomic dysfunction and associated neuropsychological risk
factors. He has repeatedly shown initiative in his own development
through project leadership, self-motivated research proposals, and an
uncanny capacity for problem-solving through independent study. I can
think of no better candidate for this award, and have no reservations in
supporting him wholeheartedly.

I completed my MD, PhD, and medical residency in preventive medicine in
Spain, with additional training in cardiovascular epidemiology at
Harvard School of Public Health. My research mainly focuses on the
epidemiology of atrial fibrillation. For the last ten years, I have
conducted extensive research in the setting of the Atherosclerosis Risk
in Communities (ARIC) Study where I am involved in studies aimed to
understand the distribution and determinants of atrial fibrillation in
the community. I am also a co-investigator in studies evaluating the
impact of cardiovascular risk factors on cognitive decline (e.g. ARIC
Neurocognitive Study). I have been continuously funded by grants from
the National Heart, Lung, Blood Institute (NHLBI) and the American Heart
Association (AHA), and have led numerous studies including the ARIC
study and the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA) on the
incidence of AF and its outcomes. I have mentored numerous students and
trainees, including PhD graduates, MPH students, and postdoctoral
fellows both at the University of Minnesota and now at Emory University.
I also have an extensive history of successful collaborations with
junior faculty that have led to publications and grant funding,
including Amit Shah, MD, MSCR, who will serve alongside me as Anish's
lead mentors.

Anish has had a common thread throughout his education thus far in
studying the mind-body connection. As an undergraduate at Emory, he
studied linguistics, neuroscience, and behavioral biology. This theme
continues as he now has multiple projects that study the relationship of
the psychological factors to the heart, including his most recent
first-author manuscript entitled "Circadian Changes in Heart Rate
Variability Predict Abnormal Myocardial Perfusion". An important aspect
of his research is that Anish independently performed the complex
statistics required for twin analysis using linear mixed models, which
was verified by our biostatisticians. This work was selected as one of
just two top-posters at the AHA Scientific Sessions 2018. One of the
interesting sub-group analyses he performed found a strong association
of heart rate variability (HRV) with depression, which he has continued
to study with Dr. Shah. To highlight his initiative, he independently
and successfully wrote a manuscript proposal to examine the relationship
of HRV with psychological stress in the ARIC study. As an ARIC
investigator, I supported his proposal and have helped him to understand
the complexities of large cohort data sets, and will continue to do so
as he completes this latest manuscript. He found in this preliminary
work that indices of HRV were independently associated with different
forms of psychological stress, including exhaustion, anger, and social
support, which showcases the importance of studying non-traditional risk
factors in understanding cardiovascular risk.

His research proposal follows a similar theme. He intends to measure
autonomic dysfunction through a novel HRV index called *Dyx*, and study
the relationship with ischemic heart disease and neuropsychological
factors including depression and cognitive impairment. He found in his
prior work that *Dyx* is a more robust indicator of autonomic
dysfunction than traditional HRV indices in a cohort from the Emory
Twins Study. Over the last several years I have studied HRV within the
ARIC cohort, looking at incidence of stroke, Parkinson's disease, and AF
risk. One inherent limitation of this prior work was the availability of
only two to five minutes of ECG recordings for analysis. The current
research proposal intends to use several hours of ECG data for analysis,
which will give us a much stronger understanding of autonomic
dysfunction as it pertains to cardiovascular risk and neuropsychological
factors. Autonomic dysfunction has growing evidence of being important
in the pathogenesis of mortality from cardiovascular disease,
particularly as it relates to susceptibility of arrhythmia. However,
little work has been done use measures of autonomic dysfunction to
identify at-risk patients, and this will be the first study to look at
*Dyx* in the role of multiple important conditions, including
obstructive coronary artery disease, depression, life stress, and
cognitive impairment. The data generated from this proposal will not
only support his prior work, but potentially establish a novel,
independent, and non-invasive risk stratification tool for
risk-stratification in ischemic heart disease.

As described, the most promising traits that Anish exemplifies are his
intellectual curiosity, independent and critical thinking, and
combination of clinical and technical expertise (e.g. experience in
statistics, programming, and data science), placing him in a unique
position to merge his talents to become an outstanding physician and
scientist. To his credit, Anish developed the core of this research
proposal himself by studying the literature in the multidisciplinary
field of neurocardiology independently, and creating a coherent,
intentional, and step-wise proposal. More so, he responded to feedback
constructively, adapting to problems and providing his own solutions,
showcasing his drive and engagement in the research process. Along with
his prior manuscript and his current paper on the ARIC cohort, he was
invited to join a review article in *Hypertension*, and was requested to
write another review on cardiac sympathetic innervation with one of our
senior cardiologists, Dr. Marc Thames. Part of his productivity stems
from how he actively reaches out for guidance and collaboration within
the mentoring team that has grown organically around him, including his
other senior advisors Dr. Viola Vaccarino and Dr. Arshed Quyyumi.

In summary, Anish is an exceptional candidate for this award who has the
fundamental characteristics to grow into clinical researcher who will
contribute substantially to this field. The MSCR will give him the
formal training to approach complex research questions with depth and
skill. He demonstrates talent and intellectual curiosity fueled by a
sincere passion for neurocardiology and innovating the means to help
serve his patients. I plan to meet with Anish individually every other
week, along with regular interactions through weekly lab meetings, and
frequent e-mail and as-needed meetings to help him with study design in
cardiovascular epidemiology, interpretation of neurocognitive impairment
data, and the assessment of electrophysiology correlates of autonomic
dysfunction. I have no doubt about his potential and future success as
he continues on to train in preventive cardiology and clinical research,
and I wish to endorse Anish with the highest regards. I am fully
committed to his academic development, and have no reservations about
serving as his Co-Lead mentor along with Dr. Shah. Please contact me
with any questions.

Sincerely,

![page3image7965952](media/image2.png){width="1.6635509623797025in"
height="0.6914709098862643in"}

Alonso Alvaro, MD, PhD

Associate Professor

Department of Epidemiology

Rollins School of Public Health

Emory University

<alvaro.alonso@emory.edu>

404-727-8714
