March 15, 2019

Georgia Clinical & Translational Science Alliance: TL1 Program

Emory University

Dear Selection Committee,

It is my sincere pleasure to express my support for Dr. Anish Shah in
his TL1 award submission for his research proposal and training through
the Masters of Science in Clinical Research (MSCR), and I am glad to
serve as an advisor and support him in his research endeavors. Anish is
an excellent candidate for this award, with a genuine enthusiasm for his
research that underscores his potential to have an exemplary trajectory
as a translational researcher.

I fully support Anish's training through the TL1 and MSCR, and feel that
his proposed study will help to understand the mechanism, role, and
pathogenesis of autonomic dysfunction as it relates to clinical outcomes
and risk-stratification. Our Emory Cardiovascular Biobank study, which I
serve as the director for, has over 6,000 patients with several years of
outcomes data, and has an ongoing, daily enrollment of patients
undergoing cardiac catherization at Emory University Hospital, Emory
University Midtown Hospital, and Grady Memorial Hospital. This will
allow for Anish to actively enroll new patients and add ECG data and
adequately power this study. The Biobank has the necessary personnel and
protocols in place that will also allow him to collect interview-based
exposures and cardiac catherization data. I will help Anish incorporate
his project proposal into the Emory Cardiovascular BioBank. I have no
doubt that his work will uniquely add value to the study as a whole.

I am the principal investigator of several other studies in clinical
translational research, and have been working the field for over 20
years. I have worked closely with Anish's mentoring team, including his
lead mentor Dr. Amit Shah and advisor Dr. Viola Vaccarino. Of not, Dr.
Shah has been remarkably productive as a young faculty and has also
completed the MSCR. I am happy to serve as an advisor to Anish as he
carries out his ancillary research project to focus on the relationship
of the novel HRV index *Dyx*, its relationship to obstructive coronary
artery disease, and the effect of other neuropsychological pathology
including depression and neurocognitive impairment. I expect that the
hands-on participation in patient recruitment and ECG collection will be
a fruitful experience, and provide insight into the technical and
logistic details in study implementation. As a translational researcher,
I am well-suited to help Anish to learn how to design, fund, and conduct
clinical trials. His previous research and data collected from this
proposal will prepare him well for future grants, including a K award as
part of his career as a clinical investigator in preventive cardiology.

I look forward to incorporating Anish's enthusiasm and energy into our
study. I have no hesitations in serving as his advisor and
enthusiastically recommend him for the TL1 award and completion of the
MSCR. I am available for any questions that may arise.

Sincerely,

Arshed Quyyumi, MD, FACC, FCRP

Director of the Emory Clinical Cardiovascular Research Institute

Professor of Medicine

Division of Cardiology

Emory University

<aquyyum@emory.edu>

404-727-3655
