March 15, 2019

Georgia Clinical & Translational Science Alliance: TL1 Program

Emory University

Dear Committee Members,

It is with great enthusiasm as I serve as an advisor for Anish Shah's
submission for the TL1 award and the Master of Science in Clinical
Research (MSCR). Anish has excelled clinically and is passionate in his
study of neurocardiology, combining his technical skills with his
interest in the relationship between cardiovascular epidemiology and
neuropsychological pathology. After joining Emory for his internal
medicine residency training, he has continued to pursue research
opportunities within the Emory Program in Cardiovascular Outcomes
Research and Epidemiology (EPICORE). Even through his residency
training, Anish has worked on several projects with members of the
mentorship team, and has shown a dedication and clinical curiosity that
are hallmarks of his potential to become an outstanding clinical
researcher.

I believe that I am well suited to serve as an advisor for Anish as part
of his mentoring team as he works to develop the research training
needed to become a clinical investigator. I am a leading cardiovascular
epidemiologist with international recognition for my work on
cardiovascular disease epidemiology and prevention, and social,
behavioral and psychological determinants of cardiovascular disease, and
have published over 270 peer-reviewed research publications. Since
joining Emory University in 2000 I have been continuously funded by the
NIH. At Emory I currently serve as the Chair of the Epidemiology
Department at the Rollins School of Public Health, where I also oversee
the doctoral program in epidemiology, and I hold the Wilton Looney
endowed chair in cardiovascular research. Furthermore, I have a joint
appointment at the School of Medicine (Cardiology), and am a member of
several other teaching and mentoring programs at Emory. Finally, I am a
project leader and member of the steering committee of P01 HL 101398,
and PI of R01 HL109413, as well as the Emory Twins Study upon which
Anish's latest manuscript on heart rate variability and myocardial
ischemia is based upon.

Perhaps my most important qualification to serve as an advisor in
Anish's application is my commitment and passion towards mentoring.
Throughout my career, I have dedicated a large part of my time to
mentoring PhD students, post-doctoral fellows and junior faculty
members. Many of my mentees have obtained career development awards or
individual fellowship grants from the NIH, the AHA and other venues
under my mentorship. Additionally, several of my trainees have received
prestigious national awards for their work. For example, Jinying Zhao, a
junior faculty member whom I had recruited to work in my team, won the
Elizabeth-Barrett Connor Award for Young Investigators at the AHA
Scientific Sessions in 2006. Jun Dai, a PhD student, won the Jeremiah
and Rose Stamler Research Award for New Investigators at the AHA
Conference on CVD Epidemiology and Prevention in 2008. Susmita Parashar,
then a junior faculty in General Medicine, won the Trudy Bush Award for
CVD Research in Women's Health in 2007 at the same conference. Many of
my trainees have pursued successful academic careers as independent
investigators. Noteworthy, I was the lead mentor for Dr. Amit Shah for
his MSCR, successful KL2 and K23 grants, and whom I recruited to join as
an Assistant Professor in the Department of Epidemiology at Rollins. Dr.
Amit Shah is now serving as one of Anish's lead mentors for the TL1
award, which underscores my commitment to the training of future
clinical investigators and the importance of mentoring teams that have
strong relationships, which will ultimately benefit Anish as he develops
his academic career.

Anish currently works on several projects within EPICORE, including his
most recent first-author paper entitled "Circadian Changes in Heart Rate
Variability Predict Abnormal Myocardial Perfusion", for which his
research was chosen as a top-poster at a recent American Heart
Association conference and that I am a co-author on. He is also working
with his other lead-mentor, Dr. Alvaro Alonso, on a manuscript studying
heart rate variability and psychosocial stress in the Atherosclerotic
Risk in Communities cohorts. His TL1 research proposal, wherein he will
study the relationship of a new HRV index *Dyx*, with obstructive
coronary disease, depression, and cognitive impairment, is an excellent
step-wise progression of his prior work, and will help to establish his
research interest in autonomic dysfunction and cardiovascular
risk-stratification. The MSCR will further enhance and formalize this
training.

As an advisor to Anish for his TL1, I will provide a number of training
opportunities within EPICORE and the T32 ("Multidisciplinary Research
Training to Reduce Inequities in Cardiovascular Health"). Our lab has
biweekly meetings which Anish will attend and allow him to discuss his
work, as well as hear about the ongoing research of other PhD, masters,
and post-doctoral fellows, as well as progress in larger faculty
projects. He will learn methodologies related to study recruitment,
database management, problem solving, data analysis and interpretation,
and study planning. He will also attend series on cardiovascular
epidemiology and health disparities by invited speakers, meet with other
trainees, and attend dedicated teaching programs in vascular biology and
biostatistics. More directly, I have already established a relationship
with Anish through his manuscript on *Dyx* and ischemic heart disease,
and I will continue to give him direct feedback as he develops his
manuscript, focusing on teaching him biostatistical and epidemiological
concepts.

In summary, Anish is a top candidate for the TL1 award who will greatly
benefit from not only the formal didactics of the MSCR, but the
application of those skills through dedicated research time. With the
support of an outstanding multidisciplinary mentoring team, I have no
doubts that Anish will be successful on his path to become a clinical
and translational researcher.

Sincerely,

Viola Vaccarino, MD, PhD

Wilton Looney Professor of Cardiovascular Research

Department of Epidemiology

Rollins School of Public Health

Professor of Medicine (Joint)

Division of Cardiology

Emory University
