**PERSONAL STATEMENT**

My long-term aim is to become an independently funded clinical
investigator in neurocardiology with a specialization in computational
techniques to elucidate the role of the autonomic nervous system on
sudden cardiac death and arrhythmia. I seek to answer the question of
what triggers sudden death, building off my studies of the mind-body
connection as an undergraduate student, clinical training in medicine,
academic interest in the neurocardiac axis, my background in computer
programming and data visualization, and my current research in heart
rate variability (HRV). The mentored training received through the TL1
award and the MSCR will provide me the fundamental tools needed to
launch myself on a trajectory to become a successful, compassionate
physician-scientist.

My interest in this field is rooted in my academic and clinical
experiences thus far. I am currently a senior resident in internal
medicine, serving on the hospital wards at Emory, Grady, and the VA. The
stories that stay with me have always been the stories of the
unexpected: the gentleman who presented to the ER with a heart attack
while holding his divorce papers, the elderly lady that died peacefully
in the hospital the day after reuniting with her grand-daughter who flew
in from out-of-country, or the sprint to two simultaneous cardiac
arrests that happened just at 7 AM. The commonality in these types of
events is the presence of a triggering moment, whether that be a
stressful event, a moment of reunion, or the abrupt circadian change
from sleep-to-wake. With the power of hindsight, its clear the seed of
my interest was planted as an undergraduate student. I majored in
linguistics and neuroscience & behavioral biology, through which I
studied the mind-body connection highlighted by a multidisciplinary
course load (e.g. Behavioral Neuroscience, Evolution of the Human Mind
and Brain, Meaning in Human Language). This interest was further
elevated through an independent study of meditation, religion, and
science at a Tibetan monastery in MacLeod Ganj, India. I also was
introduced to research early on working at Yerkes Primate Research
Center, studying the effects of maternal separation on stress in rhesus
monkeys. I developed the perspective early-on that psychological
concepts could have profound physical manifestations, which has led to
my current research in autonomic dysfunction.

As an undergraduate student, I developed a background in computer
programming and data management during my linguistics thesis, involving
word-processing and phonetics. As a medical student, I greatly advanced
my programming and statistical background during my work at Johns
Hopkins with Scott Blackman, MD, PhD. We studied the detection of
individuals at risk for cystic fibrosis related diabetes using
genome-wide association study analysis, where I also built a working
knowledge of Perl, Python, and C++, and became proficient at data
visualization using the R language. As a medical resident, I continued
to expand my research skills as I identified my Lead Mentor, Amit J.
Shah, MD, MSCR, and began my work on HRV as a measure of autonomic
function. As our first cohort used twin pairs, I learned more complex
statistical techniques, including logistic regressions and mixed effect
models. His lab is at Rollins School of Public Health at Emory in the
Department of Epidemiology, through which I have met a number of
mentoring team, including Alonso Alvaro, MD, PhD, Marc Thames, MD, Viola
Vaccarino, MD, PhD, and Arshed Quyyumi, MD. I began to work with Dr.
Alvaro, my Co-Lead Mentor, shortly thereafter, and I learned how to
submit my first manuscript proposal for an ancillary study on a large
community-based cohort called the Atherosclerotic Risk In Communities
study. This latest project, which looks at psychological stress and HRV,
is challenging as it follows a population of approximately 15,000
patients over many years, which is teaching me new skills in large data
manipulation and more complex statistical techniques such as survival
and cross-lag analysis.

My proposed research project, entitled "Disturbances of the Neurocardiac
Axis", is built on the premises of my research findings thus far. My
most recent first-author work, a manuscript currently under review
called "Circadian Changes in Heart Rate Variability Predict Abnormal
Myocardial Perfusion", highlights an index of HRV that was predictive of
abnormal myocardial perfusion imaging. My research was accepted at the
American Heart Association Scientific Sessions 2018 conference. Not only
had it made it to a national conference, but my poster was selected as
one of two top-rated posters that highlighted real-world relevance and
scientific impact. This was a pivotal moment for me as a young
researcher, as I was starting to see the difference I could make by
continuing down the path to become a clinical investigator. The paper
generated more questions than it answered, as I could not yet
confidently say abnormal HRV would predict heart disease without
confirmatory cardiac catherization. More than the practical questions,
the paper exposed gaps in the literature-- the reason for the increased
prominence of the findings in the morning hours, the mechanisms that
affect both the autonomic system and coronary blood flow, and the
limitations of measuring the complexity of sympathovagal balance with a
"simple" abstraction. The discussions on these unanswered questions I
have had with Marc Thames, MD, an advisor on my mentoring team, have
particularly inspired me to delve farther into the literature. He has an
extraordinary research career in cardiac autonomic physiology, and
recently invited me to write a clinically-oriented review on cardiac
sympathetic innervation as an extension of my capstone lecture on sudden
cardiac death and the autonomic nervous system. I was also invited to
co-author a review article for *Hypertension* on the brain-heart
connection in psychological stress by Paul Marvar, PhD from George
Washington University in collaboration with our lab group. The actual
literature review process itself in both cases is an exciting academic
challenge for me, as it has required me to synthesize a highly complex
topic in a clinically succinct and meaningful way.

The goals of the proposed research on the neurocardiac axis are to 1)
establish the role of autonomic dysfunction as an independent risk
factor for obstructive coronary artery disease (CAD), and 2) identify
the impact of neuropsychological factors on autonomic dysfunction. This
is an important first step in understanding how the brain may affect the
heart and creates a quantifiable measure to allow for
risk-stratification of patients. The TL1 award will grant me the
protected time to learn from the experience of my mentors in the
specific technical skills required for ECG collection and analysis, the
design of clinical studies that involve psychological stress, and the
implementation and enrollment of patients in an ongoing study. The MSCR
will enhance my background in biostatistics and epidemiology with formal
didactics, optimizing my ability as a researcher to study
epidemiological phenomenon, particularly psychological factors that
affect cardiovascular risk. I also hope to gain the practical skills in
clinical research, including study implementation, data collection, and
dissemination of findings through improved grant and scientific writing
skills.

The multidisciplinary and novel research approach will capitalize on the
multiple strengths of my mentors, including Dr. Shah who is an expert in
HRV analysis and has shown a personal dedication to my growth as a
physician-scientist, and Dr. Alvaro who is an investigator in large,
epidemiological studies such as the Atherosclerotic Risk in Communities
and an expert in neuropsychological impairment and cardiac arrhythmias.
The proposed training plan also incorporates career development through
grant writing, seminars, and weekly lab meetings in the Emory Program in
Cardiovascular Outcomes Research and Epidemiology, which is led by part
of my mentoring team, Dr. Viola Vaccarino. As I complete the training of
the TL1, I plan to apply for research-based training positions within
cardiology, with the overall goal to join as a junior faculty while
applying for K grants. I hope that future funding will allow me to
implement and translate my research findings into a clinical setting. I
can see HRV analyses becoming wide-spread due to its low-cost nature and
intend to conduct studies that will use autonomic dysfunction as an
independent risk factor for ischemic heart disease, helping to best
identify vulnerable patients. My mentorship team, the formal didactics
of the MSCR, and implementation of these skills in this research
proposal will give me the foundation to reach my goal of becoming a
physician-scientist in the field of neurocardiology and epidemiology. I
believe the TL1 award and MSCR is the best method for me to pursue my
career goal of becoming an independently funded clinical investigator.
