**Disturbances of the Neurocardiac Axis: Using Heart Rate Variability to
Measure Disease in the Brain and Heart**

**Principal Investigator:**

Anish Shah, MD

Resident

J. Willis Hurst Internal Medicine Residency

Department of Medicine

Phone: 469-835-7606

Email: <anish.shah@emory.edu>

**Lead Mentor:**

Amit Shah, MD, MSCR

Assistant Professor of Epidemiology

Assistant Professor of Medicine (Cardiology)

1518 Clifton Rd. NE, Rm 3053\
Atlanta, GA 30322\
Phone: 404-727-8712

Email: <ajshah3@emory.edu>

**Co-Lead Mentor:**

Alvaro Alonso, MD, PhD

Associate Professor

Department of Epidemiology

Rollins School of Public Health

Emory University

Phone: 404-727-8714

Email: <alvaro.alonso@emory.edu>

**ABSTRACT**

Ischemic heart disease (IHD) is a highly prevalent and one of the
leading causes of mortality, yet in the majority of affected
individuals, their diagnosis is not detected by clinical exam. As such,
the majority of sudden cardiac deaths occurs in those not previously
diagnosed with IHD. This suggests the need for better IHD screening
mechanisms, and a growing body of literature suggests autonomic
dysfunction may be a novel risk factor. Ambulatory electrocardiography
can be used to study autonomic dysfunction through heart rate
variability. Recently, a novel marker of heart rate variability (*Dyx*)
was found to be predictive of myocardial ischemia based on abnormal
nuclear stress test. Our group also found that low *Dyx,* when measured
in the early morning, was predictive of abnormal myocardial perfusion
imaging as well. It is not known, however, how *Dyx* correlates with
coronary angiography findings and the need for coronary intervention.
Additionally, *Dyx* is influenced by central neuropsychological
mechanisms, such as depression. Neurologic pathways may influence
coronary microvascular function and lead to ischemia even in the absence
of obstructive coronary artery disease. Assessment of depression and
cognitive impairment and their relationship with *Dyx* may help to
elucidate additional neurocardiac mechanisms on how autonomic function
may lead to adverse outcomes, even in the absence of coronary artery
disease. We will examine the relationship of neuropsychological metrics
(mood, cognitive function) and ischemic heart disease with *Dyx* to
better understand these effects in a high-risk cohort of patients with
stable angina who are undergoing cardiac catherization. Aim 1 will
evaluate the relationship of low *Dyx* with obstructive coronary artery
disease, based on cardiac catherization. Aim 2 will determine the effect
of neuropsychological pathology, as determined by depression and
cognitive impairment, on autonomic dysfunction as measured by low *Dyx*.
The goal of this study is to further evaluate the utility of *Dyx* as a
measure of autonomic dysfunction that can help risk-stratify patients
for obstructive coronary artery disease, and also determine the
influence of brain-related factors on it as well. This research will
improve our understanding of the clinical importance of disturbances of
the neurocardiac axis through a quantified measurement of autonomic
dysfunction as it relates to clinically actionable coronary artery
disease. As such, it may help to yield very important, low-cost
assessments of risk with widespread public health implications.

**\
A. SPECIFIC AIMS**

Four out of five patients with ischemic heart disease (IHD) are
unrecognized by clinical exam.^1^ The majority of sudden cardiac death
(SCD) still occurs in those without diagnosed IHD.^2^ Although the
overall rate of cardiovascular mortality is declining, the rate of
community events has not declined proportionally, suggesting the need
for more public health interventions.^3^ A growing body of literature
suggests that autonomic dysfunction is not only of prognostic value in
cardiovascular mortality,^4^ but may serve as a novel risk factor for
IHD. [Recently, a new ECG-based biomarker of autonomic dysfunction based
on heart rate variability (HRV), named *Dyx*, was found to be an
important predictor of myocardial ischemia]{.underline}.^5^ *Dyx* is
calculated from an hour-long recording of ambulatory ECG, and low values
(\< 2.0 units) are associated with an 8-fold increased odds of abnormal
nuclear stress test findings (suggesting altered regulation of coronary
blood flow and possibly IHD).^5^ While promising, the study was limited
by a small sample size, it did not assess for relationship with
angiographic findings; the outcome used, single photon emission
tomography (SPECT), is only 80% sensitive and specific for obstructive
coronary artery disease (CAD).^6^ In an analysis I independently
conducted that was highlighted at the 2018 American Heart Association
Scientific Sessions, we found that that low *Dyx* in the early morning
was predictive of myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI) deficits in a
cohort of 276 veteran twins without known CAD.^7^ We found for the first
time that the time of day in which HRV is measured is a critical step in
measuring heart disease risk. Nonetheless, we were unable to
differentiate whether this relationship is due to obstructive CAD
(requiring revascularization) and/or abnormal vascular reactivity
(likely microvascular).^8^ This is important when considering the
clinical implications of low *Dyx*.

Low *Dyx*, as with other HRV metrics, is influenced by central
neurologic mechanisms, and in an unpublished analysis in our twins
dataset, we found a robust association between depressive symptoms and
reduced *Dyx*. This suggests neurologic pathways that may influence
coronary microvascular function and lead to ischemia (even in absence of
obstructive CAD).^9^ Neurovisceral integration theory describes a
network of brain regions that influence cognitive function, mood, and
autonomic regulation that help understand the anatomy of these
connections.^10^ [Neurovisceral dysfunction]{.underline} occurs in the
setting of neuropsychological pathology, such as in depression and
cognitive impairment, which have well-known effects on autonomic
regulation,^11,12^ confer a worse prognosis in coronary artery disease
(CAD),^13,14^ and increase the risk of SCD.^15,16^ Low *Dyx* values may
be due to brain-related factors, rather than (or in addition to)
obstructive CAD.^10,17^ By studying the relationship of brain-based
metrics (mood, cognitive function) and CAD with *Dyx*, we can better
evaluate these effects.

[I hypothesize that disturbances of the neurocardiac axis, assessed by
both heart and brain metrics, associate with autonomic dysfunction,
which can be measured by *Dyx*]{.underline}. As such, Dyx is a useful
metric in both efforts to risk stratify for CAD, as well as detect
neurovisceral dysfunction. We propose to study *Dyx* by measuring HRV
through ambulatory ECG patches (BioStampÂ®, MC10 Inc.) in subjects with
chronic stable angina undergoing evaluation in the Emory Cardiovascular
Biobank. The Biobank is a prospective cohort study of individuals
undergoing clinically indicated cardiac catherizationin which conducts
validated neuropsychological assessments are also made.^18^ The data we
collect from this proposal will allow the assessment of autonomic and
neuropsychiatric function prior to the heart catheterization. Our aims
are:

1.  **To evaluate the relationship of autonomic dysfunction, measured by
    abnormal HRV, to the spectrum of progressive CAD.**
    *[Hypothesis]{.underline}:* *Low Dyx (\<2.0 units) in the morning
    hours will be associated with an increased odds of finding
    obstructive CAD (stenosis [\>]{.underline} 70%). When evaluated as a
    continuous exposure, Dyx will be negatively associated with CAD
    plaque burden (Gensini score) in a dose-response relationship.*^19^

2.  **To determine the effect of neurovisceral dysfunction, as
    determined by depressed mood and cognitive impairment, on autonomic
    dysfunction.** *[Hypothesis]{.underline}: Depressive symptoms
    (Patient Health Questionnaire-9, PHQ-9) ad cognitive impairment
    (Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA) will be independently
    associated with lower Dyx. *

The mentored research and structured didactics of the MSCR will prepare
me for my goal of becoming a physician-scientist. My future goals
include the pursuit of a K grant focusing on translational studies in
neurocardiology, risk stratification, and prevention. Under the guidance
of my mentorship team (Amit Shah, MD, MSCR (co-lead); Alvaro Alonso, MD,
PhD (co-lead); Marc Thames, MD; Viola Vaccarino, MD, PhD; Arshed
Quyyumi, MD) I will gain invaluable training in study design, primary
data collection, data analysis, manuscript preparation, and
grant-writing. This will help prepare me for my long-term goals in a
career as a clinical investigator in cardiovascular epidemiology and
translational research.

 SIGNIFICANCE
=============

B1. The Burden of Ischemic Heart Disease: a Hidden Epidemic with Unrecognized Risk Factors
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ischemic heart disease (IHD) accounts for in 1 in every 7 deaths in the
United States, with a prevalence of 3% or 7.9 million US adults.^20^
Over 700,000 new heart attacks occur annually, with annual costs of
heart attacks (\$12.1 billion). The estimated direct and indirect costs
of IHD were \$204 billion, and these medical costs are projected to
double by the year 2030.^20^ However up to 20% of MIs are silent and up
to 80% of IHD is unrecognized by standard ECG and clinical
parameters.^1^ Although there has been a decline in cardiovascular
mortality overall, the rate of out-of-hospital events has not decreased
in proportion to the rate of in-hospital events.^3^ [Mental stress plays
a role in the complications of IHD, and is an under-recognized and
important risk factor. More research on the brian-heart connection may
help unlock some of the difficult roadblocks in reducing IHD in the
community]{.underline}.^21^ New integrative and/or holistic strategies
to approach IHD and prevent its associated complications may help lead
to a downward frameshift in event rates.

B2. Autonomic Nervous System Metrics Can Help Examine CVD Risk from Neuropsychiatric Factors
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Heart rate variability (HRV) is an inexpensive biomarker derived from
ambulatory electrocardiographic monitoring.^22^ It allows for
continuous, non-invasive assessment of autonomic function, which is
influenced by neuropsychological factors, such as mental stress, and
heart disease.^23,24^ The neurovisceral integration theory provides the
anatomical basis for this relationship. This theory links cognitive and
affective networks to autonomic regulation by identifying the
differential activation of important brain structures (prefrontal
cortex, cingulate cortex, and insula).^10,25^ Psychological stress,
including depression, leads to changes in autonomic function that are
historically known to increase to the risk of ventricular ectopy, SCD,
and cardiovascular disease.^13,26--30^ Cognitive impairment,
particularly as it relates to executive function, also is related to
abnormal HRV, and leads to an increased odds of IHD independent of other
cardiovascular risk factors.^31,32^ These interesting findings suggest
that [neurovisceral dysfunction may contribute greatly to autonomic
dysfunction as measured by HRV]{.underline}. Exploring this relationship
may provide important insight into why those with dysautonomia have
worse psychological, neurological, and cardiovascular outcomes.

B3. Advances in Electrocardiography are Independently Prognostic of Cardiovascular Disease Risk
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.9in"
height="2.446527777777778in"}Advanced ECG analysis conveys information
about autonomic function that is an independent marker for
cardiovascular mortality.^22,33,34^ Traditional methods including
exercise stress testing have limited sensitivity,^6^ but HRV analysis
has led to novel risk markers for IHD that need further
investigation.^5,35^ Information within traditional HRV indices was
thought to be explained by heart rate itself,^36^ but newer indices
capture additional information.^37^ [A novel method for HRV analysis is
through a non-linear method named *Dyx*]{.underline}, which uses the
multipole method in PoincarÃ© plots where RR intervals are plotted as a
function of prior RR intervals (**Figure 1)**.^38--40^ *Dyx* measures
overall variability in heart rate, but also indicates how erratic and
non-linear the heart rate trends are as well. After MI, low *Dyx* has an
independent hazard ratio of 2.4 (CI 1.5 to 3.8) for mortality in a
recent study.^41^ Very few studies however have studied the prospective
value of autonomic dysfunction in predicting obstructive CAD as measured
by coronary angiography. A single, recent study examined *Dyx* with no
known IHD and found that low *Dyx* predicted abnormal MPI with an
improved sensitivity and specificity to exercise stress test.^5^ We
demonstrated in a cohort of 276 individuals with no known IHD from the
Emory Twin Study, [low *Dyx* in morning hours had a 12-fold increase in
the odds of abnormal MPI]{.underline}. ^7^ These findings validate the
prior work on *Dyx* but also contextualize autonomic balance within the
circadian rhythm.^42,43^ These important findings have helped to place
measures of autonomic dysfunction in a potentially clinically useful
role. Given the low costs and risks associated with this measure
(requires only ambulatory ECG), there is a pressing need for more
translational research in the area. Such technologies may ultimately
reduce the need for invasive testing with coronary angiography as well
as identify asymptomatic, high-risk individuals. [ ]{.underline}

B4. Clinical Implications and Utility of Measuring Autonomic Dysfunction
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Our research program will pursue clinical relevance for an HRV-based
biomarker, and potentially help to fill an important gap that has
prevented HRV from becoming a mainstream clinical test for
cardiovascular disease diagnosis.^22^ This potential is gaining
momentum. Based on recent research findings,^5^ HeartTrends was recently
established as a company to offer *Dyx* as a clinical tool to
risk-stratify individuals for CAD. Their work is only supported by
small, industry-sponsored studies of non-invasive cardiac imaging
however, and therefore not currently being utilized in most clinics. Our
project will provide an independent evaluation of their metrix, *Dyx*,
as a potentially measure of *obstructive CAD* as measured by *coronary
angiography*. This additional test of its clinical relevance may help
evaluate its clinical potential; if we find that it is predictive, this
may have widespread clinical implications when deciding who to send for
coronary angiography. [*Dyx* is not solely a metric of obstructive CAD
risk, however.]{.underline} It may also help measure the complex
relationship between the heart and the brain, and explain stress-related
microvascular disease dysfunction as well.^9^ This is important because
studies showing low *Dyx* as predictive of abnormal myocardial perfusion
imaging (MPI), including our own, are inherently limited: abnormal MPI
findings cannot distinguish between the larger epicardial coronary
arteries and smaller myocardial resistance vessels.^7,35^ [*Dyx*, as a
marker for neurovisceral dysfunction, may also shed light into the
mechanism of increased non-cardiac risk]{.underline}. As such, it may
have potential in predicting psychiatric outcomes such as future
depression,^44^ as well as future cognitive decline.^45^

> **C. INNOVATION**

![](media/image3.jpeg){width="1.6101837270341208in"
height="1.3270833333333334in"}Innovation is central to this proposal,
which seeks to validate a new, low-cost ECG-based measure (*Dyx*) as an
alternative diagnostic test for obstructive CAD. It may also provide a
robust measure of autonomic regulation in disturbances of the
neurocardiac axis that has additional relevance to psychiatric and
neurologic diseases. This is a paradigm shift towards metrics that have
a focus on the brain-heart connection, as opposed to focused tests on
anatomy or self-reported symptoms. This new way of seeing IHD as
connected to the neurocardiac axis may lead to clinical practice changes
in disease management as well. For example, it may promote stress
management and exercise therapy in management of IHD.^46^ *Dyx* is
relatively new and unexplored compared to other HRV indices. For the
first time, we are also taking into close consideration the time of day
when measuring HRV. ^42,47^ Most previous studies, on the other hand, do
not evaluate this at all, or average all of the HRV metrics over and
entire 24 hour period.^35,48,49^

The technology utilized for this study is also cutting edge and more
easily collected in clinical settings than previous methods. We will
utilize the BioStamp patch (**Figure 3**), which has a much lower
patient burden than traditional Holter monitoring (smaller than a credit
card).

Our study design also allows us to achive breakthrough in the assessment
of Dyx; as opposed to previous studies, we can now evaluate its
predictive potential with [with coronary angiography
findings]{.underline}. Future studies (may be included in K23) may also
evaluate the relationship of *Dyx* with secondary clinical outcomes.
Additional evaluation of *Dyx* with depression and cognitive function
will be the first studies of their kind. It will lead to better a
mechanistic understanding of the neurocardiac axis, and future work may
help to evaluate non-cardiac outcomes such as depression. Overall, our
rigorous, holistic evaluation of *Dyx* will help provide critical
assessment of its value in IHD risk prediction and evaluation of
neuropsychological pathology.

D. APPROACH
===========

D1. Study Overview
------------------

This training grant proposes an ancillary study on an ongoing
prospective registry of patients undergoing cardiac catherization, the
Emory Cardiovascular Biobank (EmCAB, PI Quyyumi) ï»¿which was established
to identify novel factors associated with the pathobiological process
and treatment of cardiovascular disease.^18^ The EmCAB is enriched for
patients with high suspicion for obstructive CAD, which provides ample
statistical power for studies of risk prediction. The registry has over
7,000 unique patients from three Atlanta-based sites in the Emory
University Hospital system. The EmCAB has ongoing enrollment (10-20
patients per ![](media/image5.jpeg){width="2.0069444444444446in"
height="2.186111111111111in"}week), with established facilities, staff,
and data collection mechanisms in place, and has IRB approval for future
research that includes analysis of de-identified data. **Figure 2**
shows an overview of the scientific basis of the proposed aims. One of
the applicant's roles will be to lead efforts in acquiring and analyzing
ECG data needed to calculate *Dyx*, as well as collaborate with the
existing study team that is already collecting self-reported data on
depression and administering a cognitive assessment. He will then work
closely with the database management, cleaning, analysis, and reporting.

D2. Study Population
====================

The EmCAB has assessed approximately 3,000 major cardiovascular events
thus far.^14^ It also evaluates additional biomarkers for inflammation,
cardiac injury, and genetics, with the goal of predicting CVD
outcomes.^18^ All patients aged 18 years and older undergoing cardiac
catherization are recruited to participate by a full-time study
coordinator. After informed consent, they are interviewed for health
behaviors and neuropsychological functioning the same day, prior to
cardiac catherization. ï»¿Detailed chart extraction is also performed.
They are excluded if they have congenital heart disease, severe valvular
heart disease, severe anemia, a recent blood transfusion, myocarditis,
history of active inflammatory disease, cancer or are unable or not
willing to provide consent (approximately 5%). We will specifically
evaluate subjects who have chronic stable angina and exclude acute
coronary syndrome.

D3. Research Design
-------------------

[General Protocol]{.underline}: The enrollment, consent, and detailed
phenotyping of the patients has been described in multiple prior studies
using the EmCAB.^18^ ï»¿Additional measures, including lifestyle factors,
medical comorbidities, revascularization during the index cardiac
catheterization, and previous revascularization procedures are
ascertained via patient interview and chart review. The sample for study
will be collected daily over the course of the first several months of
this study, with an estimated 20 patients enrolled per week. Coronary
angiographies will be evaluated by the Gensini score, which is a visual
estimation of luminal narrowing in multiple segments based on a modified
form of the American Heart Association classification of the coronary
tree by trained cardiologists.^19^

[Heart Rate Variability]{.underline}: This study will add HRV to the
data collected by the EmCAB. We will use non-invasive, continuous,
ambulatory ECG patches (BiostampÂ®, MC10 Inc), which we have acquired
through my mentor Dr. Shah. I will assist with the consent and
incorporation of ECG data collection into the larger study protocol. The
consent will occur in the early morning (7 AM --- 9 AM), after which the
patch will be applied until their angiogram. This follows from our
recent findings demonstrating that the most important time for detecting
autonomic dysfunction is between 7 AM and 10 AM.^7^ If possible, the ECG
duration will be extended. We will use the commercial HeartTrends
algorithm (Lev-El Diagnostics Ltd., Israel) to generate the *Dyx*
measure, as well as an internally developed HRV toolbox to generate
additional indices for comparison.^50^ A materials transfer agreement
with the company is already in place with HeartTrends.

[Neuropsychological Measures]{.underline}: The enrollment protocol
includes patient interviews by study staff. Depressive symptoms will be
assessed via the 9-question Primary Care Evaluation of Mental Disorders
Brief Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9).^51^ Moderate depression is
seen at a cutoff of 10 points or higher (out of 27), with a sensitivity
and specificity of 88% for major depression.^52^ Questionnaires are
included on perceived life stress and chronic burden as well. Cognitive
impairment will be measured by the Montreal cognitive assessment (MoCA),
which is a measure of global cognitive function and is comprised of the
sub-domains: memory, visuospatial function, executive function,
sustained attention, language, and orientation. The MoCA has a
sensitivity of 90% and specificity of 87% for detecting mild cognitive
impairment using a cutoff score of 26 (out of 30).^53^

[Power Calculation]{.underline}: The expected cohort size for this
ancillary study is 150 patients, which we should be able to collect over
the course of 6 months. We anticipate a maximum of 20% loss of data due
to poor ECG quality (\>20% artifact), missing data, or other exclusion
criteria as above. After these reductions we estimate a sample size of
120 patients. Out of this sample, we expect to find 80-90 patients with
CAD, 10-20 patients with depression, and 15-25 patients with cognitive
impairment. Using Î±=0.05, and 1-Î²=0.80, we would have the power to
detect an effect size as small as Cohen's f^2^=0.07---0.13 for both
specific aims (including covariates).^54^

**D4. Specific Aim \#1: To evaluate the relationship of autonomic
dysfunction, measured by abnormal HRV, on the spectrum of progressive
CAD.**

![](media/image7.jpeg){width="4.2125in"
height="1.9083092738407699in"}[Rationale]{.underline}: Abnormal HRV
indicates autonomic dysfunction and increases the risk of cardiovascular
mortality. *Dyx* has been shown to predict myocardial perfusion defects
during stress test. Our previous work suggests this finding is most
robust during morning hours, as in **Figure 4**.^7^ We are looking to,
for the first time, evaluate *Dyx* during morning hours and the
relationship with obstructive CAD and overall plaque burden.

[Data Collection and Analysis]{.underline}: I will be directly involved
with the study coordinators to enroll and consent patients for
ambulatory ECG. I will be responsible for working with the BioStamp
company to retrieve raw ECG data, and converting it into usable RR
intervals and evaluation for arrhythmia (which would be excluded from
analysis). I will communicate with the HeartTrends company to assist
with the appropriate and timely generation of the *Dyx* index through
PoincarÃ© plot analysis.^38,39^ I will learn to use the HRV toolbox under
the guidance of Dr. Shah to generate hourly frequency and geometric
domain indices of HRV for additional HRV assessments.^50^ Familiarizing
myself with the mathematical principles and technical skills underlying
signal processing will be critical for my training. I will compare the
exposure of HRV to the outcome of coronary artery plaque burden,
measured by the Gensini score, from cardiac catherization using linear
regression models, with multivariate analysis to evaluate the
performance of HRV against traditional risk factors. Logistic regression
models will be fit using a clinical cutoff point of *Dyx* (\< 2.0 units)
against obstructive CAD (stenosis [\>]{.underline} 70%).^22^ I will
perform these analyses independently, under the guidance of Dr. Alonso
and Dr. Shah, to help apply the biostatistics skills strengthened by
formal coursework during the MSCR.

[Potential Problems and Solutions]{.underline}: This patient population
is likely to have a higher proportion of patients on beta-blockers,
which has a known effect on heart rate and spectral HRV.^55^ For
patients on beta-blocker therapy we will perform an additional subgroup
analysis to prevent confounding. Continuous ECG data are susceptible to
artifact, which may lead to erroneous data. Such data can be edited to
remove noise and ectopy, and interpolated to fill gaps, which existing
software techniques allow for the easy cleaning of raw RR interval data.

[Anticipated Results]{.underline}: We expect to find an independent
association with autonomic dysfunction in the morning hours, measured by
low *Dyx*, with progressive coronary artery plaque burden.

**D5. Specific Aim \#2: To determine the effect of neurovisceral
dysfunction on autonomic dysfunction. **

[Rationale]{.underline}: Both cognitive impairment and depression are
not only common in patients with CAD, but are prognostic after MI,
independent of traditional risk factors.^31,56,57^ Our preliminary
analyses from the Emory Twin Study found *Dyx* to be a significant
determinant of depressive symptoms (r= 0.14, p\<0.001 in 276
individuals). Also, in a preliminary analysis from the Atherosclerotic
Risk In Communities (ARIC) study, psychological life stressors like
exhaustion are associated with abnormal HRV. Cognitive impairment also
associates with decreases in HRV.^58^ We will look to elucidate the
relationship of depression and stress and cognitive impairment with
*Dyx* as a marker for neurovisceral dysfunction.

[Data Collection and Analysis]{.underline}: The primary exposures will
be depressive symptoms (PHQ-9), stress (questionnaire), and cognitive
impairment (MoCA score). The primary outcome will be autonomic function,
measured by *Dyx* and other HRV indices. I will create linear regression
models for the continuous *Dyx* measure, and logistic regressions for
*Dyx* using the clinical cutoff of \<2 units.^22^ As in **Aim \#1**, I
will create models that adjust for cardiovascular risk factors to assess
for confounding due to sociodemographic and traditional risk factors. My
training through the MSCR will provide me the necessary tools to conduct
these analyses. Dr. Alonso is an expert in cognitive decline and heart
disease, and will help in the analysis and interpretation of these data.
Dr. Shah will help in the evaluation of depression and HRV as well.

[Potential Problems and Solutions]{.underline}: The PHQ-9 is not
validated in the setting of acute stress, for which we will exclude
patients diagnosed with acute coronary syndrome. Treatment of depression
may lead to favorable changes in HRV. We will control for antidepressant
use through additional subgroup analysis. The generalizability of this
data is difficult, as patients with severe cognitive impairment may not
be referred for catherization, and thus excluded from the study.

D6. Mentorship and Training Integration
---------------------------------------

The combination of direct human research experience (including patient
enrollment and study design), data management and analysis, dedicated
course work through the MSCR, and the clinical training from my
residency are integral to building my foundation as a
physician-scientist. Dr. Shah has an expertise in ECG signal processing
and psychosocial stress and has been a dedicated mentor for the past
three years. We will have frequent in-person and phone meetings, and he
will provide guidance on data measurement, analysis, and interpretation
of HRV data. Dr. Alonso studies the effect of neurocognitive factors on
arrhythmia risk, and is an investigator in a large clinical cohort, the
Atherosclerotic Risk In Communities study (ARIC). We will meet in-person
every other week, where he will provide guidance on study design and
data interpretation as it relates to neurocognitive impairment, as well
as direction on statistical analysis. Dr. Thames is a senior
cardiologist with extensive research into the cardiac autonomic nervous
system. He has provided expert insight into mechanisms and pathways in
prior manuscripts and will continue to teach me the interpretation of
translational research in cardiac autonomic function. Dr. Vaccarino, as
the head of the Emory Program in Cardiovascular Outcomes Research and
Epidemiology (EPICORE) and T32 program, conducts biweekly meetings that
I will participate in, allowing me to share my work, meet with other
trainees, and attend seminars by invited speakers on cardiovascular
disease epidemiology and health disparities. I will also participate in
dedicated teaching programs in vascular biology and biostatistics as a
trainee in EPICORE. She will also provide feedback on manuscript
drafting focused on epidemiology and biostatistics concepts. Dr. Quyyumi
is the lead investigator of the EmCAB and has participated in a number
of clinical trials. He will help me integrate this new HRV component
into the EmCAB, giving me guidance on the practical steps needed to
modify and design a clinical study, and provide manuscript feedback
focusing on translational and clinical aspects. Certain skills gained
through the MSCR curriculum will be foundational to my success as a
researcher. Of note, the *MSCR 594 Scientific and Grant Writing* will
help as I prepare to apply for my first K grant in preventive
cardiology. With my background in programming, including the statistical
language R, the basic and advanced biostatistics courses including *MSCR
534 Analytic Methods for Clinical and Translational Research* *and MSCR
596 Advanced Data Management in R* will enhance my ability to become an
independent researcher.

D7. Timeline
------------

This research proposal is intended to allow for completion of several
projects over the course of the upcoming academic year, from July 2019
to June 2020. I will spend 35-45% of my time completing academic
coursework for the MSCR, including additional classes and seminars in
advanced biostatistics and statistical programming languages. I expect
to split my remaining time between implementation of the proposed study
protocol, including enrollment, data collection, and study design, and
primary data analysis. No clinical work will be assigned. I intend to
start working with the EmCAB coordinators, the MC10 BioStamp company,
and the HeartTrends group by July 2019 or earlier to facilitate a
productive research year. In January of 2020, I will start with the
statistical analysis and the preparation of manuscripts to be submitted.
By March of 2020, I will dedicate time to completing the dissertation
and start grant proposals for future studies, along with research
opportunities through fellowship in academic cardiology.

D8. Future Directions
---------------------

We expect to find a clinically meaningful (risk ratio \>2) association
with the non-linear HRV index, *Dyx*, and obstructive CAD, highlighting
the utility of autonomic dysfunction as an independent risk factor for
CAD. I also expect to find an independent association of *Dyx* with
depression and neurocognitive impairment, demonstrating its role in
quantifying neurocardiac health, and highlighting the importance of the
brain in this relationship. I hope to use this research as the basis for
screening for autonomic dysfunction through ECG to identify those at
risk for obstructive CAD, and future grants would further elaborate on
this work with larger sample sizes, clinical outcomes, and additional
mechanisms such as inflammatory biomarkers. I also plan on using HRV as
a tool to research the effects of neuropsychological factors on
cardiovascular disease risk, such as directionality and effect size,
with the intent to eventually direct interventions that may be
protective.
