**Introduction to Revised Application**

We greatly appreciate the many constructive comments in the initial TL1
submission, including comments about the candidate ("excellent clinical
training"), the mentorship team ("extensive experience"), the training
plan ("key MSCR courses"), the research plan ("innovative"), and the
environment ("strong"). The review committee raised several important
points regarding institutional support, project feasibility, training,
and study implementation. As a result, we have refocused the application
to include specifics about the academic home, departmental support,
study methods, career plan, and project focus. The application was
shortened in parts to allow for the requested changes. Revisions have
been marked by blue font.

1.  **Academic Home**: This has been addressed, as per the letters. In
    review: I am completing my internal medicine residency within the
    Department of Medicine (DOM) at the end of June 2019. Starting July
    2019, I will be appointed as a post-doctoral fellow within the
    Department of Epidemiology at Rollins School of Public Health
    (RSPH). Letters of support documenting this have been sent by Drs.
    Law and Dressler from DOM, and from Drs. Shah and Alonso from RSPH.

2.  **Letter of Support from Department Chair**: The prior departmental
    letter was from my current position within the Department of
    Medicine. Attached is a supporting letter from Dr. Timothy Lash, the
    current Chair in the Department of Epidemiology at RSPH. This
    position is dedicated to research, and requires no clinical
    obligations.

3.  **BioStamp Patches**: We appreciate the need to clarify the funding
    support for these patches, as they are critical for the support of
    the project. The reusable BioStamp patches have already been
    obtained by Dr. Amit Shah, and additional supplies are being ordered
    with his discretionary funding.

4.  **Sample Size Calculations**: Because of the exploratory nature of
    the study, they are designed as pilots -- we recognized the effect
    sizes may be too small to calculate group differences, but feel that
    the data will be very helpful for future grant applications and for
    more definitive evaluations of *Dyx,* neuropsychatric function, and
    coronary artery disease. We appreciate the importance of
    understanding the power from the pre-selected sample size (based on
    feasibility). I have met with the BERD consultant for assistance and
    he will help us to calculate appropriate power.

5.  **Specific Aims**: Reviewer 2 raised the concern that our aims could
    have improved focus, particularly our focus on neuropsychological
    factors. We have reordered the aims, as seen in the modified Figure
    3, and separated depression and cognitive impairment as individual
    outcomes.

6.  **Research Project Funding**: Reviewer 2 requested further
    information into how the project would be funded. As the project is
    an ancillary study on the EmCAB, under the mentor Dr. Arshed Quyyumi
    (PI), the necessary resources including study staff are already
    available, which we have now added into the application.

7.  **Candidate Training Timeline**: Reviewer 2 requested specifics on
    training timeline, which has been added to section D8, including
    research products and step-wise career goals.

8.  **Human Subjects Protection**: Both reviewers requested further
    documentation of human subjects and inclusion of women, children,
    and minorities, which has now been included.

9.  **Project Feasibility**: Reviewer 1 raised the concern that the MSCR
    and the research obligations may limit project feability. We will
    address this by increasing the amount of delegation to the current
    study staff, and increasing the effort towards the rigors of the
    MSCR.

10. **Research Experience**: Reviewer 1 noted the lack of published
    research products. I am continuing to address this by submitting
    additional manuscripts, including 1 research paper and 2 review
    articles, related to the field of neurocardiology.

**Disturbances of the Neurocardiac Axis: Using Heart Rate Variability to
Measure Disease in the Brain and Heart**

**Principal Investigator:**

Anish Shah, MD

Resident

J. Willis Hurst Internal Medicine Residency

Department of Medicine

Phone: 469-835-7606

Email: <anish.shah@emory.edu>

**Lead Mentor:**

Amit Shah, MD, MSCR

Assistant Professor of Epidemiology

Assistant Professor of Medicine (Cardiology)

1518 Clifton Rd. NE, Rm 3053\
Atlanta, GA 30322\
Phone: 404-727-8712

Email: <ajshah3@emory.edu>

**Co-Lead Mentor:**

Alvaro Alonso, MD, PhD

Associate Professor

Department of Epidemiology

Rollins School of Public Health

Emory University

Phone: 404-727-8714

Email: <alvaro.alonso@emory.edu>

**ABSTRACT**

Ischemic heart disease (IHD) is a highly prevalent and one of the
leading causes of mortality, yet in the majority of affected
individuals, their diagnosis is not detected by clinical exam. As such,
the majority of sudden cardiac deaths occurs in those not previously
diagnosed with IHD. This suggests the need for better IHD screening
mechanisms, and a growing body of literature suggests autonomic
dysfunction may be a novel risk factor. Ambulatory electrocardiography
can be used to study autonomic dysfunction through heart rate
variability. Recently, a novel marker of heart rate variability (*Dyx*)
was found to be predictive of myocardial ischemia based on abnormal
nuclear stress test. Our group also found that low *Dyx,* when measured
in the early morning, was predictive of abnormal myocardial perfusion
imaging as well. It is not known, however, how *Dyx* correlates with
coronary angiography findings and the need for coronary intervention.
Additionally, *Dyx* is influenced by central neuropsychological
mechanisms, such as depression. Neurologic pathways may influence
coronary microvascular function and lead to ischemia even in the absence
of obstructive coronary artery disease. Assessment of depression and
cognitive impairment and their relationship with *Dyx* may help to
elucidate additional neurocardiac mechanisms on how autonomic function
may lead to adverse outcomes, even in the absence of coronary artery
disease. We will examine the relationship of neuropsychological metrics
(mood, cognitive function) and ischemic heart disease with *Dyx* to
better understand these effects in a high-risk cohort of patients with
stable angina who are undergoing cardiac catherization. Aim 1 will
evaluate the relationship of low *Dyx* with obstructive coronary artery
disease, based on cardiac catherization. Aim 2 will determine the effect
of neuropsychological pathology, as determined by depression, stress,
and cognitive impairment, on autonomic dysfunction as measured by low
*Dyx*. The goal of this study is to further evaluate the utility of
*Dyx* as a measure of autonomic dysfunction that can help risk-stratify
patients for obstructive coronary artery disease, and also determine the
influence of brain-related factors on it as well. This research will
improve our understanding of the clinical importance of disturbances of
the neurocardiac axis through a quantified measurement of autonomic
dysfunction as it relates to clinically actionable coronary artery
disease. As such, it may help to yield very important, low-cost
assessments of risk with widespread public health implications.

**\
A. SPECIFIC AIMS**

Four out of five patients with ischemic heart disease (IHD) are
unrecognized by clinical exam.^1^ The majority of sudden cardiac death
(SCD) still occurs in those without diagnosed IHD.^2^ Although the
overall rate of cardiovascular mortality is declining, the rate of
community events has not declined proportionally, suggesting the need
for more public health interventions.^3^ A growing body of literature
suggests that autonomic dysfunction is not only of prognostic value in
cardiovascular mortality,^4^ but may serve as a novel risk factor for
IHD. [Recently, a new ECG-based biomarker of autonomic dysfunction based
on heart rate variability (HRV), named *Dyx*, was found to be an
important predictor of myocardial ischemia]{.underline}.^5^ *Dyx* is
calculated from an hour-long recording of ambulatory ECG, and low values
(\< 2.0 units) are associated with an 8-fold increased odds of abnormal
nuclear stress test findings (suggesting altered regulation of coronary
blood flow and possibly IHD).^5^ While promising, the study was limited
by a small sample size, it did not assess for relationship with
angiographic findings; the outcome used, single photon emission
tomography (SPECT), is only 80% sensitive and specific for obstructive
coronary artery disease (CAD).^6^ In an analysis I independently
conducted that was highlighted at the 2018 American Heart Association
Scientific Sessions, we found that that low *Dyx* in the early morning
was predictive of myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI) deficits in a
cohort of 276 veteran twins without known CAD.^7^ We found for the first
time that the time of day in which HRV is measured is a critical step in
measuring heart disease risk. Nonetheless, we were unable to
differentiate whether this relationship is due to obstructive CAD
(requiring revascularization) and/or abnormal vascular reactivity
(likely microvascular).^8^ This is important when considering the
clinical implications of low *Dyx*.

Low *Dyx*, as with other HRV metrics, is influenced by central
neurologic mechanisms, and in an unpublished analysis in our twins
dataset, we found a robust association between depressive symptoms and
reduced *Dyx*. This suggests neurologic pathways that may influence
coronary microvascular function and lead to ischemia (even in absence of
obstructive CAD).^9^ Neurovisceral integration theory describes a
network of brain regions that influence cognitive function, mood, and
autonomic regulation that help understand the anatomy of these
connections.^10^ [Neuropsychiatric disturbances]{.underline}, such as
depression and cognitive impairment, have well-known effects on
autonomic regulation,^11,12^ and confer a worse prognosis in coronary
artery disease (CAD),^13,14^ and an increased risk of SCD.^15,16^ Low
*Dyx* values may be due to brain-related factors, rather than (or in
addition to) obstructive CAD.^10,17^ By studying the relationship of
brain-based metrics (mood, cognitive function) and CAD with *Dyx*, we
can better evaluate these effects.

[I hypothesize that disturbances of the neurocardiac axis, assessed by
both heart and brain metrics, associate with autonomic dysfunction,
which can be measured by *Dyx*]{.underline}. As such, Dyx is a useful
metric in both efforts to risk stratify for CAD, as well as detect
neurovisceral dysfunction. We propose to study *Dyx* by measuring HRV
through ambulatory ECG patches (BioStamp®, MC10 Inc.) in subjects with
chronic stable angina undergoing evaluation in the Emory Cardiovascular
Biobank. The Biobank is a prospective cohort study of individuals
undergoing clinically indicated cardiac catherization in which conducts
validated neuropsychological assessments are also made.^18^ The data we
collect from this proposal will allow us to assess the relationship
between autonomic function, neuropsychiatric status, and cardiac
catherization. Our aims are:

1.  **To determine the effect of neuropsychiatric disturbances, as
    determined by depressed mood and cognitive impairment, on autonomic
    dysfunction.** *[Hypothesis]{.underline}: (A) High levels of
    depressive symptoms (Patient Health Questionnaire-9, PHQ-9), and (B)
    cognitive impairment (Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA) will be
    associated with low Dyx.*

2.  **To evaluate the relationship of autonomic dysfunction, measured by
    abnormal HRV, to the spectrum of progressive CAD.**
    *[Hypothesis]{.underline}:* *Low Dyx (\<2.0 units) in the morning
    hours associates with an increased odds of finding obstructive CAD
    (stenosis [\>]{.underline} 70%). When evaluated as a continuous
    exposure, Dyx negatively associates with CAD plaque burden (Gensini
    score) in a dose-response relationship.*^19^

The mentored research and structured didactics of the MSCR will prepare
me for my goal of becoming a physician-scientist. My future goals
include the pursuit of a K grant focusing on translational studies in
neurocardiology, risk stratification, and prevention. Under the guidance
of my mentorship team (Amit Shah, MD, MSCR (co-lead); Alvaro Alonso, MD,
PhD (co-lead); Marc Thames, MD; Viola Vaccarino, MD, PhD; Arshed
Quyyumi, MD) I will gain invaluable training in study design, primary
data collection, data analysis, manuscript preparation, and
grant-writing. This will help prepare me for my long-term goals in a
career as a clinical investigator in cardiovascular epidemiology and
translational research.

 SIGNIFICANCE
=============

B1. The Burden of Ischemic Heart Disease: a Hidden Epidemic with Unrecognized Risk Factors
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ischemic heart disease (IHD) accounts for in 1 in every 7 deaths in the
United States, with a prevalence of 3% or 7.9 million US adults.^20^
Over 700,000 new heart attacks occur annually, with annual costs of
heart attacks (\$12.1 billion). The estimated direct and indirect costs
of IHD were \$204 billion, and these medical costs are projected to
double by the year 2030.^20^ However up to 20% of MIs are silent and up
to 80% of IHD is unrecognized by standard ECG and clinical
parameters.^1^ Although there has been a decline in cardiovascular
mortality overall, the rate of out-of-hospital events has not decreased
in proportion to the rate of in-hospital events.^3^ [Mental stress plays
a role in the complications of IHD, and is an under-recognized and
important risk factor. More research on the brain-heart connection may
help unlock some of the difficult roadblocks in reducing IHD in the
community]{.underline}.^21^ New integrative and/or holistic strategies
to approach IHD and prevent its associated complications may help lead
to a downward frameshift in event rates.

B2. Autonomic Nervous System Metrics Can Help Examine CVD Risk from Neuropsychiatric Factors
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Heart rate variability (HRV) is an inexpensive biomarker derived from
ambulatory electrocardiographic monitoring.^22^ It allows for
continuous, non-invasive assessment of autonomic function, which is
influenced by neuropsychological factors, such as mental stress, and
heart disease.^23,24^ The neurovisceral integration theory provides the
anatomical basis for this relationship. This theory links cognitive and
affective networks to autonomic regulation by identifying the
differential activation of important brain structures (prefrontal
cortex, cingulate cortex, and insula).^10,25^ Psychological stress,
including depression, leads to changes in autonomic function that are
historically known to increase to the risk of ventricular ectopy, SCD,
and cardiovascular disease.^13,26--30^ Cognitive impairment,
particularly as it relates to executive function, also is related to
abnormal HRV, and leads to an increased odds of IHD independent of other
cardiovascular risk factors.^31,32^ These interesting findings suggest
that [neurovisceral dysfunction may contribute greatly to autonomic
dysfunction as measured by HRV]{.underline}. Exploring this relationship
may provide important insight into why those with dysautonomia have
worse psychological, neurological, and cardiovascular outcomes.

B3. Advances in Electrocardiography are Independently Prognostic of Cardiovascular Disease Risk
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.9in"
height="2.4993055555555554in"}Advanced ECG analysis conveys information
about autonomic function that is an independent marker for
cardiovascular mortality.^22,33,34^ Traditional methods including
exercise stress testing have limited sensitivity,^6^ but HRV analysis
has led to novel risk markers for IHD that need further
investigation.^5,35^ Information within traditional HRV indices was
thought to be explained by heart rate itself,^36^ but newer indices
capture additional information.^37^ [A novel method for HRV analysis is
through a non-linear method named *Dyx*]{.underline}, which uses the
multipole method in Poincaré plots where RR intervals are plotted as a
function of prior RR intervals (**Figure 1)**.^38--40^ *Dyx* measures
overall variability in heart rate, but also indicates how erratic and
non-linear the heart rate trends are as well. After MI, low *Dyx* has an
independent hazard ratio of 2.4 (CI 1.5 to 3.8) for mortality in a
recent study.^41^ Very few studies however have studied the prospective
value of autonomic dysfunction in predicting obstructive CAD as measured
by coronary angiography. A single, recent study examined *Dyx* with no
known IHD and found that low *Dyx* predicted abnormal MPI with an
improved sensitivity and specificity to exercise stress test.^5^ We
demonstrated in a cohort of 276 individuals with no known IHD from the
Emory Twin Study, [low *Dyx* in morning hours had a 12-fold increase in
the odds of abnormal MPI]{.underline}. ^7^ These findings validate the
prior work on *Dyx* but also contextualize autonomic balance within the
circadian rhythm.^42,43^ These important findings have helped to place
measures of autonomic dysfunction in a potentially clinically useful
role. Given the low costs and risks associated with this measure
(requires only ambulatory ECG), there is a pressing need for more
translational research in the area. Such technologies may ultimately
reduce the need for invasive testing with coronary angiography as well
as identify asymptomatic, high-risk individuals. [ ]{.underline}

B4. Clinical Implications and Utility of Measuring Autonomic Dysfunction
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Our research program will pursue clinical relevance for an HRV-based
biomarker, and potentially help to fill an important gap that has
prevented HRV from becoming a mainstream clinical test for
cardiovascular disease diagnosis.^22^ This potential is gaining
momentum. Based on recent research findings,^5^ HeartTrends was recently
established as a company to offer *Dyx* as a clinical tool to
risk-stratify individuals for CAD. Their work is only supported by
small, industry-sponsored studies of non-invasive cardiac imaging
however, and therefore not currently being utilized in most clinics. Our
project will provide an independent evaluation of their metrix, *Dyx*,
as a potentially measure of *obstructive CAD* as measured by *coronary
angiography*. This additional test of its clinical relevance may help
evaluate its clinical potential; if we find that it is predictive, this
may have widespread clinical implications when deciding who to send for
coronary angiography. [*Dyx* is not solely a metric of obstructive CAD
risk, however.]{.underline} It may also help measure the complex
relationship between the heart and the brain, and explain stress-related
microvascular disease dysfunction as well.^9^ This is important because
studies showing low *Dyx* as predictive of abnormal myocardial perfusion
imaging (MPI), including our own, are inherently limited: abnormal MPI
findings cannot distinguish between the larger epicardial coronary
arteries and smaller myocardial resistance vessels.^7,35^ [*Dyx*, as a
marker for neurovisceral dysfunction, may also shed light into the
mechanism of increased non-cardiac risk]{.underline}. As such, it may
have potential in predicting psychiatric outcomes such as future
depression,^44^ as well as future cognitive decline.^45^

> **C. INNOVATION**

![](media/image3.jpeg){width="1.6101837270341208in"
height="1.3270833333333334in"}Innovation is central to this proposal,
which seeks to validate a new, low-cost ECG-based measure (*Dyx*) as an
alternative diagnostic test for obstructive CAD. It may also provide a
robust measure of autonomic regulation in disturbances of the
neurocardiac axis that has additional relevance to psychiatric and
neurologic diseases. This is a paradigm shift towards metrics that have
a focus on the brain-heart connection, as opposed to focused tests on
anatomy or self-reported symptoms. This new way of seeing IHD as
connected to the neurocardiac axis may lead to clinical practice changes
in disease management as well. For example, it may promote stress
management and exercise therapy in management of IHD.^46^ *Dyx* is
relatively new and unexplored compared to other HRV indices. For the
first time, we are also taking into close consideration the time of day
when measuring HRV. ^42,47^ Most previous studies, on the other hand, do
not evaluate this at all, or average all of the HRV metrics over and
entire 24 hour period.^35,48,49^

The technology utilized for this study is also cutting edge and more
easily collected in clinical settings than previous methods. We will
utilize the BioStamp patch (**Figure 2**), which has a much lower
patient burden than traditional Holter monitoring (smaller than a credit
card).

Our study design also allows us to achive breakthrough in the assessment
of Dyx; as opposed to previous studies, we can now evaluate its
predictive potential with [with coronary angiography
findings]{.underline}. Future studies (may be included in K23) may also
evaluate the relationship of *Dyx* with secondary clinical outcomes.
Additional evaluation of *Dyx* with depression and cognitive function
will be the first studies of their kind. It will lead to better a
mechanistic understanding of the neurocardiac axis, and future work may
help to evaluate non-cardiac outcomes such as depression. Overall, our
rigorous, holistic evaluation of *Dyx* will help provide critical
assessment of its value in IHD risk prediction and evaluation of
neuropsychological pathology.

D. APPROACH
===========

D1. Study Overview
------------------

This training grant proposes an ancillary study on an ongoing
prospective registry of patients undergoing cardiac catherization, the
Emory Cardiovascular Biobank (EmCAB, PI Quyyumi) ﻿which was established
to identify novel factors associated with the pathobiological process
and treatment of cardiovascular disease.^18^ The EmCAB is enriched for
patients with high suspicion for obstructive CAD, which provides ample
statistical power for studies of risk prediction. The registry has over
7,000 unique patients from three Atlanta-based sites in the Emory
University Hospital system. The EmCAB has ongoing enrollment (10-20
patients per week), with
![](media/image5.jpeg){width="2.0069444444444446in"
height="2.2333333333333334in"}established facilities, staff, and data
collection mechanisms in place, and has IRB approval for future research
that includes analysis of de-identified data. **Figure 3** shows an
overview of the scientific basis of the proposed aims. The ECG data
needed to calculate *Dyx* will be added as an ancillary study using the
existing study team. The current coordinator will apply the patch and
retrieve the data. Processing of HRV is automatic and will be available
from the Biostamp software suite.

D2. Study Population
====================

The EmCAB has assessed approximately 3,000 major cardiovascular events
thus far.^14^ It also evaluates additional biomarkers for inflammation,
cardiac injury, and genetics, with the goal of predicting CVD
outcomes.^18^ All patients aged 18 years and older undergoing cardiac
catherization are recruited to participate by a full-time study
coordinator. After informed consent, they are interviewed for health
behaviors and neuropsychological functioning the same day, prior to
cardiac catherization. They are excluded if they have congenital heart
disease, severe valvular heart disease, severe anemia, a recent blood
transfusion, myocarditis, history of active inflammatory disease, cancer
or are unable or not willing to provide consent (approximately 5%). We
will also exclude those with acute coronary syndrome.

D3. Research Design
-------------------

[General Protocol]{.underline}: The enrollment, consent, and detailed
phenotyping of the patients has been described in prior studies of the
EmCAB.^18^ ﻿Additional measures, including lifestyle factors, medical
comorbidities, revascularization during the index cardiac
catheterization, and previous revascularization procedures are
ascertained via patient interview and chart review. The study sample
will be collected daily over the first several months, with an estimated
10-20 patients enrolled per week. Coronary angiography will be evaluated
by the Gensini score, which is a visual estimation of luminal narrowing
in multiple segments based on a modified form of the American Heart
Association classification of the coronary tree by trained
cardiologists.^19^

[Heart Rate Variability]{.underline}: This study will add HRV to the
data collected by the EmCAB. We will use non-invasive, continuous,
ambulatory ECG patches (Biostamp®, MC10 Inc), which have already been
acquired through my mentor Dr. Shah. I will assist with the consent and
incorporation of ECG data collection into the larger study protocol. The
consent will occur in the early morning (7 AM --- 9 AM), after which the
patch will be applied until their angiogram. Our recent findings
demonstrate that the most important time for detecting autonomic
dysfunction is between 7 AM and 10 AM.^7^ If possible, the ECG duration
will be extended. We will use the commercial HeartTrends algorithm
(Lev-El Diagnostics Ltd., Israel) to generate the *Dyx* measure, as well
as an internally developed HRV toolbox to generate additional indices
for comparison.^50^ A materials transfer agreement with the company is
already in place with HeartTrends.

[Neuropsychological Measures]{.underline}: The enrollment protocol
includes patient interviews by study staff. Depressive symptoms will be
assessed via the 9-question Primary Care Evaluation of Mental Disorders
Brief Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9).^51^ Moderate depression is
seen at a cutoff of 10 points or higher (out of 27), with a sensitivity
and specificity of 88% for major depression.^52^ Cognitive impairment
will be measured by the Montreal cognitive assessment (MoCA), which is a
measure of global cognitive function and is comprised of the
sub-domains: memory, visuospatial function, executive function,
sustained attention, language, and orientation. The MoCA has a
sensitivity of 90% and specificity of 87% for detecting mild cognitive
impairment with a score of 26 (out of 30).^53^

[Power Calculation]{.underline}: In this exploratory pilot study, the
expected cohort size is 150 patients, collected over the first 6 months.
We anticipate a maximum of 20% loss of data due to poor ECG quality
(\>20% artifact), missing data, or other exclusion criteria as above. We
do not expect attrition as this is a cross-sectional study. After these
reductions, we expect a sample size of 120 patients. We expect a rate of
70% of CAD, and 15-20% of neuropsychiatric disease. After
biostatistician consultation, we will use α=0.05, and 1-β=0.80. We would
be adequately powered to detect a large effect size in for the primary
outcomes for both specific aims (Cohen's d = 0.5).^54^

**D4. Specific Aim \#1: To determine the effect of neuropsychiatric
disturbances, as determined by depressed mood and cognitive impairment,
on autonomic dysfunction.**

[Rationale]{.underline}: Depression and cognitive impairment are not
only common is patients with CAD, but are also prognostic after MI,
indepdent of traditional risk factors.^31,56,58,59^ Our preliminary
analyses from the Emory Twin Study found *Dyx* to be a significant
determinant of depressive symptoms (r= 0.14, p\<0.001 in 276
individuals). Also, in a preliminary analysis from the Atherosclerotic
Risk In Communities (ARIC) study, psychological life stressors such as
exhaustion and anger are associated with abnormal HRV. Cognitive
impairment also associates with decreases in HRV.^57^ We will look to
elucidate the independent relationship Dyx, a marker of neuropsychiatric
disturbance, with depression and cognitive impairment, which has not yet
been studied.

[Data Collection and Analysis]{.underline}: I will be directly involved
with the study coordinators to enroll and consent patients for
ambulatory ECG. I will be responsible for working with the BioStamp
company to retrieve raw ECG data, and will use the HRV toolbox to
automatically extract and convert it into usable RR intervals and
evaluate for arrhythmia (which would be excluded from analysis). I will
communicate with the HeartTrends company to assist with the appropriate
and timely generation of the *Dyx* index through Poincaré plot
analysis.^38,39^ I will learn to use the HRV toolbox under the guidance
of Dr. Shah to generate hourly frequency and geometric domain indices of
HRV for additional HRV assessments.^50^ Familiarizing myself with the
mathematical principles and technical skills underlying signal
processing will be critical for my training. The primary exposures will
be depressive symptoms (PHQ-9) and cognitive impairment (MoCA score).
The exposures will be analyzed for correlation. The primary outcome will
be autonomic function, measured by *Dyx* and other HRV indices. Each
exposure will be included in individual regressions models for the
continuous *Dyx* measure, and logistic regressions for *Dyx* using the
clinical cutoff of \<2 units.^22^ Secondary outcomes will adjust for
sociodemographic and traditional cardiovascular risk factors. My
training through the MSCR will provide me the necessary tools to conduct
these analyses, with support from Dr. Alonso and Dr. Shah in evaluation
and interpretation of the data.

[Potential Problems and Solutions]{.underline}: The PHQ-9 is not
validated in the setting of acute stress, for which we will exclude
patients diagnosed with acute coronary syndrome. Treatment of depression
may lead to favorable changes in HRV. We will control for antidepressant
use through additional subgroup analysis. The generalizability of this
data is difficult, as patients with severe cognitive impairment may not
be referred for catherization, and thus excluded from the study.

[Anticipated Results]{.underline}: We expect to find an independent
association of depression and cognitive impairment with autonomic
dysfunction, measured by low *Dyx*.

**D5. Specific Aim \#2: To evaluate the relationship of autonomic
dysfunction, measured by abnormal HRV, on the spectrum of progressive
CAD.**

![](media/image7.jpeg){width="4.2125in"
height="1.9083092738407699in"}[Rationale]{.underline}: Abnormal HRV
indicates autonomic dysfunction and increases the risk of cardiovascular
mortality. *Dyx* has been shown to predict myocardial perfusion defects
during stress test. Our previous work suggests this finding is most
robust during morning hours, as in **Figure 4**.^7^ We are looking to,
for the first time, evaluate *Dyx* during morning hours and the
relationship with obstructive CAD and overall plaque burden.

[Data Collection and Analysis]{.underline}:I will compare the exposure
of HRV to the outcome of coronary artery plaque burden, measured by the
Gensini score, from cardiac catherization using linear regression
models. Logistic regression models will be fit using a clinical cutoff
point of *Dyx* (\< 2.0 units) against obstructive CAD (stenosis
[\>]{.underline} 70%).^22^ Secondary outcomes will evaluate the
performance of HRV against traditional risk factors. I will perform
these analyses independently to help apply the biostatistics skills
strengthened by formal coursework during the MSCR.

[Potential Problems and Solutions]{.underline}: This patient population
is likely to have a high proportion of patients on beta-blockers, which
has a known effect on heart rate and spectral HRV.^55^ For patients on
beta-blocker therapy we will perform an additional subgroup analysis to
prevent confounding. Continuous ECG data are susceptible to artifact,
which may lead to erroneous data. Such data can be edited to remove
noise and ectopy, and interpolated to fill gaps, which existing software
techniques allow for the easy cleaning of raw RR interval data.

[Anticipated Results]{.underline}: We expect to find an independent
association with autonomic dysfunction in the morning hours, measured by
low *Dyx*, with progressive coronary artery plaque burden.

D7. Mentorship and Training Integration
---------------------------------------

Dr. Shah, as an expert in ECG signal processing and psychological
stress, has been a dedicated mentor for the past three years. We will
have frequent in-person and phone meetings, and he will provide guidance
on data measurement, analysis, and interpretation of HRV metrics. Dr.
Alonso stuies the effect of neurocognitive factors on arrhythmia risk
and is an investigator in a large clinical cohort, the Atherosclerotic
Risk In Communities study (ARIC). We will meet in-person every other
week. He will provide guidance on study design, statistical analysis,
and interpretation of neurocognitive impairment. Dr. Thames is a senior
cardiologist with extensive research training in the cardiac autonomic
nervous system, and has provided expert insight into mechanisms in prior
manuscripts. He will continue to guide me in interpretation of basic and
translational research, and share insight into autonomic mechanisms. Dr.
Vaccarino, as the head of the Emory Program in Cardiovascular Outcomes
Research and Epidemiology (EPICORE) and T32 program, conducts biweekly
meetings that I will participate in by presenting my work, meeting with
other trainees, and attending seminars by invited speakers on
cardiovascular disease epidemiology. I will participate in dedicated
teaching programs in vascular biology and biostatistics as a trainee in
EPICORE. She will also provide feedback on manuscript drafting focused
on epidemiology and biostatistics concepts. Dr. Quyyumi is the lead PI
of the EmCAB, and has provided the research funding and study staff to
allow for the integration of the new HRV component into the EmCAB. He
will provide manuscript feedback, as well as provide guidance on the
translational aspects of study design. The coure *MSCR 594 Scientific
and Grant Writing* will give me exposure as for my F32 and future K23
grant in preventive cardiology. The basic and advanced biostatistics
courses including *MSCR 534 Analytic Methods for Clinical and
Translational Research* *and MSCR 596 Advanced Data Management in R*
will enhance my ability to become an independent researcher.

D8. Timeline
------------

This research proposal is intended to allow for completion of several
projects over the course of the upcoming academic year, from July 2019
to June 2020, during which I am appointed as post-doctoral research
fellow at the RSPH and will have no clinical obligations. I will spend
45-55% of my time completing academic coursework for the MSCR, including
additional classes and seminars in advanced biostatistics and
statistical programming languages. The remaining time will be dedicated
to implementation of the study protocol, including enrollment, data
collection, and primary data analysis. I will start to work with EmCAB
coordinators, the MC10 BioStamp company, and the HeartTrends group by
July 2019 or earlier. I will participate in direct enrollment only as
time allows, as the EmCAB is already well-staffed, which wll allow me to
focus on the MSCR and the direct research. The patient data collection
will be completed by December 2019. From January 2020 onwards,
statistical analysis and manuscript preparation will begin. By March
2020, I will dedicate time to completion of the dissertation and begin
future grant proposals, including an F32 grant. I will present at local
research meetings starting in the fall, submit at least 2 abstracts for
national meetings by early spring, and have submitted 2 first-author
manuscripts. I will apply for fellowship in academic cardiology
subsequently, and apply for a K23 grant as I join faculty as a clinical
investigator.

D9. Future Directions
---------------------

We expect to find a clinically meaningful (risk ratio \>2) association
with the non-linear HRV index, *Dyx*, and obstructive CAD, highlighting
the utility of autonomic dysfunction as an independent risk factor for
CAD. We also expect to find an independent association of *Dyx* with
depression and neurocognitive impairment, demonstrating its role in
quantifying neurocardiac health, and highlighting the importance of the
brain in this relationship. I hope to use this research as the basis for
screening for autonomic dysfunction through ECG to identify those at
risk for obstructive CAD, and future grants would further elaborate on
this work with larger sample sizes, clinical outcomes, and additional
mechanisms such as inflammatory biomarkers. I also plan on using HRV as
a tool to research the effects of neuropsychological factors on
cardiovascular disease risk, such as directionality and effect size,
with the intent to eventually direct interventions that may be
protective.

**REFERENCES**

1\. Turkbey EB, Nacif MS, Guo M, et al. Prevalence and correlates of
myocardial scar in a US cohort. *JAMA - J Am Med Assoc*.
2015;314(18):1945-1954. doi:10.1001/jama.2015.148492. Hayashi M, Shimizu
W, Albert CM. The Spectrum of Epidemiology Underlying Sudden Cardiac
Death. *Circ Res*. 2015;116(12):1887-1906.
doi:10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.116.3045213. Gerber Y, Jacobsen SJ, Frye RL,
Weston SA, Killian JM, Roger VL. Secular trends in deaths from
cardiovascular diseases: A 25-year community study. *Circulation*.
2006;113(19):2285-2292. doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.5904634. La
Rovere MT, Bigger JT, Marcus FI, Mortara A, Schwartz PJ. Baroreflex
sensitivity and heart-rate variability in prediction of total cardiac
mortality after myocardial infarction. *Lancet*. 1998;351(9101):478-484.
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(97)11144-85. Goldkorn R, Naimushin A, Shlomo N,
et al. Comparison of the usefulness of heart rate variability versus
exercise stress testing for the detection of myocardial ischemia in
patients without known coronary artery disease. *Am J Cardiol*.
2015;115(11):1518-1522. doi:10.1016/j.amjcard.2015.02.0546. Chou R,
Qaseem A, Biebelhausen J, et al. Cardiac screening with
electrocardiography, stress echocardiography, or myocardial perfusion
imaging: Advice for high-value care from the american college of
physicians. *Ann Intern Med*. 2015;162(6):438-447.
doi:10.7326/M14-12257. Shah A, Lampert R, Goldberg J, Bremner JD,
Vaccarino V, Shah A. Abstract 15216: Circadian Autonomic Inflexibility:
A Marker of Ischemic Heart Disease. In: *Circulation*. Vol 138. American
Heart Association; 2018:A15216-A15216.
doi:10.1161/circ.138.suppl\_1.152168. Murthy VL, Naya M, Taqueti VR, et
al. Effects of Sex on Coronary Microvascular Dysfunction and Cardiac
Outcomes. *Circulation*. 2014;129(24):2518-2527.
doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.113.0085079. Vaccarino V, Votaw J, Faber T,
et al. Major depression and coronary flow reserve detected by positron
emission tomography. *Arch Intern Med*. 2009;169(18):1668-1676.
doi:10.1001/archinternmed.2009.33010. Richard Jennings J, Allen B,
Gianaros PJ, Thayer JF, Manuck SB. Focusing neurovisceral integration:
Cognition, heart rate variability, and cerebral blood flow.
*Psychophysiology*. 2015;52(2):214-224. doi:10.1111/psyp.1231911. Stein
PK, Carney RM, Freedland KE, et al. Severe depression is associated with
markedly reduced heart rate variability in patients with stable coronary
heart disease. *J Psychosom Res*. 2000;48(4-5):493-500.
doi:10.1016/S0022-3999(99)00085-912. Beer NR, Soroker N, Bornstein NM,
Leurer MK. Association between cardiac autonomic control and cognitive
performance among patients post stroke and age-matched healthy
controls---an exploratory pilot study. *Neurol Sci*.
2017;38(11):2037-2043. doi:10.1007/s10072-017-3097-013. Carney RM,
Freedland KE. Depression and coronary heart disease. *Nat Rev Cardiol*.
2017;14(3):145-155. doi:10.1038/nrcardio.2016.18114. Shah AJ,
Ghasemzadeh N, Zaragoza-Macias E, et al. Sex and age differences in the
association of depression with obstructive coronary artery disease and
adverse cardiovascular events. *J Am Heart Assoc*. 2014;3(3):e000741.
doi:10.1161/JAHA.113.00074115. Lown B. Sudden cardiac death \-- 1978.
*Circulation*. 1979;60(7):1593-1599. doi:10.1161/01.CIR.60.7.159316.
Lampert R, Joska T, Burg MM, Batsford WP, McPherson CA, Jain D.
Emotional and physical precipitants of ventricular arrhythmia.
*Circulation*. 2002;106(14):1800-1805.
doi:10.1161/01.CIR.0000031733.51374.C117. Fukuda K, Kanazawa H, Aizawa
Y, Ardell JL, Shivkumar K. Cardiac Innervation and Sudden Cardiac Death.
*Circ Res*. 2015;116(12):2005-2019. doi:10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.116.30467918.
Ko YA, Hayek S, Sandesara P, Samman Tahhan A, Quyyumi A. Cohort profile:
The Emory Cardiovascular Biobank (EmCAB). *BMJ Open*.
2017;7(12):e018753. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-01875319. Gensini GG. A
more meaningful scoring system for determining the severity of coronary
heart disease. *Am J Cardiol*. 1983;51(3):606.
doi:10.1016/S0002-9149(83)80105-220. Benjamin EJ, Virani SS, Callaway
CW, et al. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics---2018 Update: A Report
From the American Heart Association. *Circulation*.
2018;137(12):CIR.0000000000000558. doi:10.1161/CIR.000000000000055821.
Wei J, Rooks C, Ramadan R, et al. Meta-analysis of mental stress-induced
myocardial ischemia and subsequent cardiac events in patients with
coronary artery disease. In: *American Journal of Cardiology*. Vol 114.
; 2014:187-192. doi:10.1016/j.amjcard.2014.04.02222. Sassi R, Cerutti S,
Lombardi F, et al. Advances in heart rate variability signal analysis:
Joint position statement by the e-Cardiology ESC Working Group and the
European Heart Rhythm Association co-endorsed by the Asia Pacific Heart
Rhythm Society. *Europace*. 2015;17(9):1341-1353.
doi:10.1093/europace/euv01523. Chyun DA, Wackers FJT, Inzucchi SE, et
al. Autonomic dysfunction independently predicts poor cardiovascular
outcomes in asymptomatic individuals with type 2 diabetes in the DIAD
study. *SAGE open Med*. 2015;3:2050312114568476.
doi:10.1177/205031211456847624. Carney RM, Freedland KE. Depression and
heart rate variability in patients with coronary heart disease. *Cleve
Clin J Med*. 2009;76(SUPPL.2). doi:10.3949/ccjm.76.s2.0325. Thayer JF,
Lane RD. A model of neurovisceral integration in emotion regulation and
dysregulation. *J Affect Disord*. 2000;61(3):201-216.
doi:10.1016/S0165-0327(00)00338-426. Engel GL. Sudden and rapid death
during psychological stress. Folklore or folk wisdom? *Ann Intern Med*.
1971;74(5):771-782. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-74-5-77127. Rahe RH, Bennett
L, Romo M, Siltanen P, Arthur RJ. Subjects' recent life changes and
coronary heart disease in Finland. *Am J Psychiatry*.
1973;130(11):1222-1226. doi:10.1176/ajp.130.11.122228. Greene WA,
Goldstein S, Moss AJ. Psychosocial Aspects of Sudden Death: A
Preliminary Report. *Arch Intern Med*. 1972;129(5):725-731.
doi:10.1001/archinte.1972.0032005004900529. Carney RM, Freedland KE,
Miller GE, Jaffe AS. Depression as a risk factor for cardiac mortality
and morbidity: A review of potential mechanisms. In: *Journal of
Psychosomatic Research*. Vol 53. ; 2002:897-902.
doi:10.1016/S0022-3999(02)00311-230. Penninx BWJH. Depression and
cardiovascular disease: Epidemiological evidence on their linking
mechanisms. *Neurosci Biobehav Rev*. 2017;74:277-286.
doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.07.00331. Deckers K, Schievink SHJ,
Rodriquez MMF, et al. Coronary heart disease and risk for cognitive
impairment or dementia: Systematic review and meta-analysis. *PLoS One*.
2017;12(9). doi:10.1371/journal.pone.018424432. Zeki Al Hazzouri A,
Elfassy T, Carnethon MR, Lloyd-Jones DM, Yaffe K. Heart Rate Variability
and Cognitive Function in Middle-Age Adults: The Coronary Artery Risk
Development in Young Adults. *Am J Hypertens*. 2018;31(1):27-34.
doi:10.1093/ajh/hpx12533. Kleiger RE, Miller JP, Bigger JT, Moss AJ.
Decreased heart rate variability and its association with increased
mortality after acute myocardial infarction. *Am J Cardiol*.
1987;59(4):256-262. doi:10.1016/0002-9149(87)90795-834. Lombardi F,
Sandrone G, Pernpruner S, et al. Heart rate variability as an index of
sympathovagal interaction after acute myocardial infarction. *Am J
Cardiol*. 1987;60(16):1239-1245. doi:10.1016/0002-9149(87)90601-135.
Oieru D, Moalem I, Rozen E, et al. A novel heart rate variability
algorithm for the detection of myocardial ischemia: pilot data from a
prospective clinical trial. *Isr Med Assoc J*. 2015;17(3):161-165.36.
Sacha J. Interaction between Heart Rate and Heart Rate Variability. *Ann
Noninvasive Electrocardiol*. 2014;19(3):207-216.
doi:10.1111/anec.1214837. Stein PK, Domitrovich PP, Huikuri H V.,
Kleiger RE. Traditional and nonlinear heart rate variability are each
independently associated with mortality after myocardial infarction. *J
Cardiovasc Electrophysiol*. 2005;16(1):13-20.
doi:10.1046/j.1540-8167.2005.04358.x38. Tayel M, AlSaba E. Poincaré Plot
for Heart Rate Variability. *Int J Medical, Heal Biomed Bioeng Pharm
Eng*. 2015;9(9):708-711.39. Olesen RM, Bloch Thomsen PE, Saermark K, et
al. Statistical analysis of the DIAMOND MI study by the multipole
method. *Physiol Meas*. 2005;26(5):591-598.
doi:10.1088/0967-3334/26/5/00240. Lewkowicz M, Levitan J, Puzanov N,
Shnerb N, Saermark K. Description of complex time series by multipoles.
*Phys A Stat Mech its Appl*. 2002;311(1-2):260-274.
doi:10.1016/S0378-4371(02)00831-241. Jørgensen RM, Abildstrøm SZ,
Levitan J, et al. Heart Rate Variability Density Analysis (Dyx) and
Prediction of Long-Term Mortality after Acute Myocardial Infarction.
*Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol*. 2016;21(1):60-68.
doi:10.1111/anec.1229742. Boudreau P, Dumont G, Kin NMKNY, Walker C-DD,
Boivin DB. Correlation of heart rate variability and circadian markers
in humans. In: *2011 Annual International Conference of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society*. IEEE; 2011:681-682.
doi:10.1109/IEMBS.2011.609015343. Stein PK, Lundequam EJ, Clauw D,
Freedland KE, Carney RM, Domitrovich PP. Circadian and ultradian rhythms
in cardiac autonomic modulation. *Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol -
Proc*. 2006:429-432. doi:10.1109/IEMBS.2006.25955844. Huang M, Shah A,
Su S, et al. Association of Depressive Symptoms and Heart Rate
Variability in Vietnam War--Era Twins. *JAMA Psychiatry*.
2018;75(7):705. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2018.074745. Shah AJ, Su S,
Veledar E, et al. Is Heart Rate Variability Related To Memory
Performance in Middle Aged Men? *Psychosom Med*. 2011;73(6):475-482.
doi:10.1097/PSY.0b013e3182227d6a.Is46. Schneider RH, Rainforth M V.,
Grim CE, et al. Stress Reduction in the Secondary Prevention of
Cardiovascular Disease. *Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes*.
2012;5(6):750-758. doi:10.1161/circoutcomes.112.96740647. Bonnemeier H,
Wiegand UKH, Brandes A, et al. Circadian profile of cardiac autonomic
nervous modulation in healthy subjects: Differing effects of aging and
gender on heart rate variability. *J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol*.
2003;14(8):791-799. doi:10.1046/j.1540-8167.2003.03078.x48. Houle MS,
Billman GE. Low-frequency component of the heart rate variability
spectrum: a poor marker of sympathetic activity. *Am J Physiol Circ
Physiol*. 1999;276(1):H215-H223. doi:10.1152/ajpheart.1999.276.1.H21549.
Jørgensen RM, Levitan J, Halevi Z, et al. Heart rate variability density
analysis (Dyx) for identification of appropriate implantable
cardioverter defibrillator recipients among elderly patients with acute
myocardial infarction and left ventricular systolic dysfunction.
*Europace*. 2015;17(12):1848-1854. doi:10.1093/europace/euu39450. Vest
AN, Da Poian G, Li Q, et al. An open source benchmarked toolbox for
cardiovascular waveform and interval analysis. *Physiol Meas*.
2018;39(10):105004. doi:10.1088/1361-6579/aae02151. Spitzer RL.
Validation and Utility of a Self-report Version of PRIME-MD: The PHQ
Primary Care Study. *JAMA*. 1999;282(18):1737.
doi:10.1001/jama.282.18.173752. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The
PHQ-9: validity of a brief depression severity measure. *J Gen Intern
Med*. 2001;16(9):606-613.53. Nasreddine ZS, Phillips NA, Bédirian V, et
al. The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: a brief screening tool for
mild cognitive impairment. *J Am Geriatr Soc*. 2005;53(4):695-699.
doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2005.53221.x54. Dupont WD, Plummer WD. Power and
sample size calculations for studies involving linear regression.
*Control Clin Trials*. 1998;19(6):589-601.
doi:10.1016/S0197-2456(98)00037-355. Sandrone G, Mortara A, Torzillo D,
La Rovere MT, Malliani A, Lombardi F. Effects of beta blockers (atenolol
or metoprolol) on heart rate variability after acute myocardial
infarction. *Am J Cardiol*. 1994;74(4):340-345.
doi:10.1016/0002-9149(94)90400-656. Lowenstern A, Wang TY. Rethinking
Cognitive Impairment in the Management of Older Patients With
Cardiovascular Disease. *J Am Heart Assoc*. 2019;8(4).
doi:10.1161/JAHA.119.01196857. Lin F, Ren P, Cotton K, Porsteinsson A,
Mapstone M, Heffner KL. Mental fatigability and heart rate variability
in mild cognitive impairment. *Am J Geriatr Psychiatry*.
2016;24(5):374-378. doi:10.1016/j.jagp.2015.12.01258. Smolderen KG,
Buchanan DM, Gosch K, et al. Depression Treatment and 1-Year Mortality
after Acute Myocardial Infarction: Insights from the TRIUMPH Registry
(Translational Research Investigating Underlying Disparities in Acute
Myocardial Infarction Patients' Health Status). *Circulation*.
2017;135(18):1681-1689. doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.02514059.
Williams JE, Mosley TH, Kop WJ, Couper DJ, Welch VL, Rosamond WD. Vital
Exhaustion as a Risk Factor for Adverse Cardiac Events (from the
Atherosclerosis Risk In Communities \[ARIC\] Study). *Am J Cardiol*.
2010;105(12):1661-1665. doi:10.1016/j.amjcard.2010.01.340

**\
PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS**

This research plan proposes to perform an ancillary study on an ongoing
prospective cohort study, called the Emory Cardiovascular Biobank
(EmCAB, PI Quyyumi). This cohort is a registry of patients undergoing
cardiac catherization to identify novel factors associated with
pathobiological processes and treatment of cardiovascular disease. All
patients are aged 18 years and older, and are at risk for coronary
artery disease. The study was approved by the Emory University
Institutional Review Board (IRB) and complied with federal, state, and
internal regulations, including HIPAA. Recruited participants are men
and women.

1.  **Risks to Subjects**

This ancillary study will not involve any significant additional risks
to the patients included in the EmCAB parent study. The patients will be
asked to wear the Biostamp patch, which may cause discomfort, limitation
in activity, and skin irritation upon removal. The patches will be
applied by a trained personnel. The collected ECG data and analysis do
not represent acute markers of illness that prompt referral to a medical
provider.

2.  **Adequacy of Protection against Risks**

All subjects included in the parent studies provided informed consent,
approved by the IRB. Additional consent for the Biostamp will be
integrated into the current study, with modifications to be approved of
by the IRB. As part of the parent study, a supervising attending
physician is available for evaluation of any events that may occur.
Participants will be asked to contact the PI if there are any questions
regarding the study.

3.  **Potential Benefits of Proposed Research to the Subjects and
    Others**

This research is not specifically designed to provide a benefit to
participants of the parent study. The potential benefits lie in
identification of autonomic dysfunction that can be used to help in risk
prediction and preventive strategies in the future.

4.  **Importance of Knowledge to Be Gained**

By gaining an better understanding of disturbances of the neurocardiac
axis, through measurement of autonomic dysfunction, we will be able to
understand mechanisms behind cardiac and non-cardiac risk, and
potentially develop preventive and treatment strategies.

5.  **Data and Safety Monitoring Plan**

The parent studies from which data will be derived for this grant are
observational studies that involve minimal additional risk to study
participants. The EmCAB has an established Data Safety Monitoring Plan
which have been used to report adverse events to the IRB and, if needed,
stop the study in the event of an adverse reaction. There are no
expected adverse events that will occur by the use of the Biostamp patch
or in the data collected therein. Additionally, I will only use
de-identified data that is hosued at Emory University. Therefore, the
analyses propsed and data collected pose minimal risk to the
participants.

**INCLUSION OF WOMEN, MINORITIES, AND CHILDREN**

This research plan proposes to perform an ancillary study on an ongoing
prospective cohort study, called the Emory Cardiovascular Biobank
(EmCAB, PI Quyyumi). This cohort is a registry of patients undergoing
cardiac catherization to identify novel factors associated with
pathobiological processes and treatment of cardiovascular disease. All
patients are aged 18 years and older, and are at risk for coronary
artery disease. The study was approved by the Emory University
Institutional Review Board (IRB) and complied with federal, state, and
internal regulations, including HIPAA. The planned enrollment expects a
comparable number of men and women of diverse racial/ethnic profiles.
Similar to the EmCAB cohort description, we expect the mean age at
enrollment to be 63, with approximately 64% male, 72% white, 24% black,
2% Asian and 1% Hispanic. The planned analyses in this proposal will
attempt subgroup analyses stratified by sex and race, but may not be
powered to detect differences. The parent study does not include or
recruit children, as the aim of the study was to evaluate subjects at
risk for coronary artery disease, which rarely develops in persons \<18
years of age.
